 Thank you. Om Asato Maa Sadgamaya Tamaso Maa J Amritam Gamaya Om Shanti Shanti Shanti It's so good to hear many of you chanting the prayer. So you must be thinking, what, I have come to IIT and sat with sadhu santon ke saath bed gaye ab some of you might be thinking because you are going to study a sizable chunk of Rajyog Patanjali Yog Sutra ka naam suna hai na? Yog ka naam toh suna hi hai zarur so because you are going to study that and especially designed for your needs how to build focus how to build concentration how to have a steady mind how to manage the mind how to stop over thinking how to think properly correctly how to handle negative emotions how to build emotional intelligence as a design karke hum log Rajyoga aapko sikhayenge. Okay, it is tailor cut to meet your needs. So but only thing is you must pay attention, wo bhi sikhayenge how to pay attention and how to build attention and how to keep it riveted. To all this will be under observation in this course. Isiliye yeh bahut important course hai. Yeh a If you become master of this, you can achieve anything in life. It's only a matter of time. And if this is not there, whatever you do, you know, you will take very long time to get a grip on anything in life. So, you must learn this art . If you learn the art of attention and the mechanics of focus, you can work magic I am telling you. When we were students this is how we worked. You must maximize your attention and then you can minimize your efforts. If you have minimum attention you maximize your efforts still the fruits will not come. To asal cheez pakad leni hai. So, the entire course has been designed like that many technical concepts will be there, but everything will be explained. First two are theory classes and the next 2 sessions, see each session please note has 2 classes. So, pehle 2 sessions theory ke hai which means 4 classes of theory I will be taking and then 4 classes of practicals jahaan par aap actually karoge jo hum padh rahe hain. So be attentive and get as much as you can from this course, this is all I want hm or visual aid through PPTs. So, you will get a huge volume of knowledge. See this course is in huge demand, isile ye log record bhi kar rahe hain. So, you will always have the videos and it will be put on NRCV channel. So, you will have it with you, but this is entirely dependent on you. So, be up and doing this is the time when you should really stand on your feet and achieve what you want to achieve. You can do what you want you like to do, by that time your likes also will change you know, but this is the time to build your life. So, learn the art of attention hm. Let me tell you the importance of this Rajyog what we are going to study. Rajyog jo hai it is actually the way of attaining the highest in human life just by the powers of your mind, by the concentration of your mind, by your ribbited attention. So, attention kise build up karna hai, you will find the secret of that here. And it is also the art of keeping the mind steady, kyuki the mind is the platform upon which you build your attention, is not it. If the mind is doing all sorts of things all the time, how will you build attention attention isn't it if the mind is doing all sorts of things all the time how will you build attention the mind management is served techniques is may practical techniques which you can adopt so you see it is a huge science Vivekananda Katede Rajyoga is actually the science of religion the rationale of all worship, prayers, ceremonials and miracles, it is the rationale, the science of it. So, actually a science and it is our own science you know, it is very unique to this culture because you know it very well, we have a huge spiritual culture in this heritage and this research took place here for the longest periods of human history and by the very best minds this culture could produce. So, un logon ka jo produce hai final product hai wo hume ab mil raha hai. So, try to catch it just take it into your system ye application ki baat hai I am not going to give you theory or I am not going to give you something from Rajyog which you cannot apply, only what is required for you, I told you it is tailor made for you and for students and for young people. So, that you become high achievers wherever you are, this is what we want because we are going to you know how our economy is rising. So, tomorrow you will be at the helm of change on this globe. So, it is a self-development module. Remember all the courses they are all under self-development modules because you know everything about the external world but you don't know too much about yourself Think about it Am I right? We know about all types of kinetic energy We know nuclear energy, we know solar energy Do you know about vital energy? Have you ever heard that vital energy is a thing, life is a thing? No, you don't even get to hear it nowadays. So this is the energy that functions in your body, this is your vitality, that is also an energy. So what is it about? Isn't it important to know ah instead of just knowing every other form of external energy, you should also know what is the energy that animates you, what is the energy that helps you work and think and how to handle that energy. Because once you learn to handle that energy, your thought process, your emotions, your will, everything will work for you. And if they don't, they will do their own job and you will be left thinking, what happened, I did so much work, but I didn't get success. This happens. So you understand what I'm trying to say, yoga is very important no matter what you are. It is a you know it is a way of life, it is not a huge philosophy, it is actually a psychological understanding, psychological philosophy. Aapne agar Patanjali Yog Sutra naam suna ho, see it is a 2nd century BC text but even today super relevant because it is to do with our mind was same mind abhi bhi kaam kar raha hai na. So it is very very relevant very very practical meaningful only if you catch it properly and Rajyog is a development over Patanjali Yog because it is a special contribution of Swami Vivekananda. Vey bade Rajyogi the, bade yogi the or Mahapurush the, Rishi the, to he had the right to create a an entire new system of yoga. It it has elements of Patanjali yoga, but there is something more added to that. So, you must catch all the essential points properly hm or yeh aapko ah help karega see practically let me tell you where it will you will find application handling your compulsive thought process. Compulsive thought ka matlab hai ah somehow thinking is going on and you are not even conscious kabhi kabhi hota hai na, bahut baar hota hai aisa The thinking is going on but I am not thinking My worries, my fears are all going on Toh isko compulsive thought pattern karete hai When you are not in charge, you are not even conscious Kuch aise hi, aise hi nikal raha hai andar se So, this will come under control Unproductive thinking, wrong thinking, over thinking So, this will come under control. Unproductive thinking, wrong thinking, overthinking and negative thinking will come under control with this science. Your emotional balance will come, emotional intelligence because if your emotions are not intelligent, you know, they will drain you, they will carry you somewhere. So, emotional intelligence develops with this and orientation which means real will power will develop, focus will develop, self discipline will develop naturally and pain management will develop all kinds of you know you need to manage a whole lot of things in today's modern lifestyle, ambiguity management hai, bahut kuch hai na. So, all ability to manage this is connected to mind management and pain management. Pain you must remember it is only 20 percent circumstantial, 80 percent it is psychological. Your fear, threat, activation all this builds up and causes so much of pain for some little incident . So, naturally when you study this . See, laying of proper habits this also we will pass through what it means and proper practices ah as long as you are taking this course, I will introduce to a small you to a small meditation also. Ab karte rahoge mind calm rahega, balanced calm state of mind you will experience by yourself and naturally a healthy emotional and thought world you will connect with that immediately. Or a phyda hai iska you see it it gives physical agility and mental focus. Ye to tamas hota hai na you do not want to move, do not want to stir ye chala jaata hai naturally with this science and in addition to that it it is about self-development, developing the world is there, you have to do it but developing yourself also is very important in the process so this is essentially self-development module, so now we will start, see you have long periods of study Big sessions of 2 hours So I will give you a slight break after 1 hour You can drink water, you can do whatever you want But again we will resume the session So every time we meet 2 sessions together 2 classes together in 1 session Right? So you just pay attention Now I told you This Rajayog has to do with vital energy in your system You have studied and are doing a lot of energies but you don't know much about what vitality is Vital energy in your system. The vitality you feel in your body is due to vital energy. Your thought mechanism is due to vital energy. These are expressions of vital energy. Your emotions, it is due to your vital energy. Because you have this level of vitality within you, all this is happening in your mind. So, if you want to control these, you must regulate the energy flow in your system. This is what Rajeyog teaches you. If energy is blocked, kya hota hai? Exactly what happens with external energy you know, it will lead to an explosion somewhere. So, when you have mental explosions, emotional outbursts, intellectual obsessions, it is blockage of vital energy. If you maintain it properly in your system, your thought world will be very clear, your emotions will be stable. You know your intelligence will sparkle, this is the age for that or ye nahi can't do this, then you know drain of energy. One decade you drain your energy, you will get used to it. You will live a mediocre life, even if you are a PhD from IIT. Unless you take your energies into your hands. So that's why this vital energy, which is called pran shakti, you must have some theoretical knowledge about vital energy Remember, the highest expression of this vital energy is your thought process Vivekananda used to say this The highest expression of your vital energy is your thought So, if you stabilize it, your thought will become magical it is the tool for change. Otherwise you know it is overcrowded thinking, over thinking, wrong thinking, negative thinking, ye fear, anger, worry, hatred all this nonsense. So, vital energy ko regulate karna hai aur thought word ko clear or thought work clear this is the first step and you should also understand that your thoughts work at three levels. One is unconscious thought, it is the level of instincts, all your reflex actions are instinctual . So, that is the level of you did not even think about it, but an instinctual life is a base life. You would not go any far with that. Animals are that kind of life, animals are instinctual. The glory of the human being is you are capable of the second level of thought which is conscious thought. Aapne soch samajh ke kuchh kiya hai that is your worth. You reason, you analyze, you apply your mind, application of mind, application of conscious thought process, this is the second level of thought. It is above instinct, please see. It includes your reasoning capacities, your analytical capacities, your ability to metacognize which means think about your thinking, it includes all this, but there is a level higher than this also. That is called the not just conscious level, but the super conscious level so this level comes by deepening your conscious level becoming fully conscious thus you become super conscious so this is the highest level of thought which means in that state such facts are revealed to you which no instinct or reason can bring to you. This is called Samadhi Avastha in Yoga, super conscious state. So you are capable of these three levels of thought. Now you think and see what level you are at. Is it mainly instinct or is it at least reason or superconscious theory is there, we are studying in this class but you are capable of this these three levels are available to you so the way you train your mind you will get accordingly you will get results and you will actually elevate your life attain whatever you want to attain in life you remember this spirituality only teaches you how to enjoy life how to better your life does not take you away from life remember this always yoga it will teach you how to enjoy life really truly it will not take you away from life. So, master these few principles Vivekananda ye bhi kehate the ki see in the past all the great masters of ah the science they always said that their knowledge came from the beyond it may be came from some angel or some Deva something they would say but the science of yoga tells you it came from within themselves you have to unravel remove the obstacles to it and it will come out so this is the science which teaches you to do that step by step just try to get a grip over everything that the science will tell you. They are only analyzing your states of mind. You will immediately relate with this science. This I can tell you definitely. And they are only analyzing your states of mind and helping you overcome negative states of mind and helping you overcome negative states of mind and helping you build self awareness . Conscious thought process in anything if you have self awareness your performance will be 100 times better . I would like to show you this slide, just look at this slide. High self-awareness leads to better team performance. This simulation shows that it affects decision making, coordination and conflict management. Look at the graph there, look at the bar graphs for decision quality, self-awareness teams it is 68 percent, coordination self-awareness teams it is 73 percent, conflict management 65 percent and no self-awareness it is just 32 percent, 27 percent and 35 percent. High self-awareness teams are always successful. This is data garnered from very important ah experiments in Harvard. So, understand this that the more self-aware you are the better decisions you will take naturally. Easily I may carry you conscious thought process has to come fully into your life and it should be deepened. Your coordination with people will be far better. Your creativity will develop you know magnificently and conflict management will be far better. Aur ek cheez aapko ye bhi dekhna chahiye, it is connected to this yes you see this one how mindfulness works as an on the spot intervention. Just look at that diagram there any challenging work situation if there is an unconscious response you will go into threat activation and negative emotions . Isn't this true? But if it is there is a conscious response, you will go into awareness of the situation and awareness of need to be mindful . Then on the spot mindfulness will naturally generate techniques to step down threat response and prevent escalation and gather present moment facts. So, this will lead to increased focus and clarity which means decreased threat activation and decrease negative emotions and the outcome will be finally, improved performance in negotiations and decreased counterproductive workplace behaviors If something doesn't go my way, then start shouting, start fighting, throw things or just shout at somebody and go away This should not happen in our life You will not be allowed to function like this once you enter your work spaces I don't know what you do at home with your mom But I am telling you a mature individual will become like this. You should be able to handle every situation without any counterproductive workplace behavior. This will only come if there is self-awareness. Otherwise, I told you threat activation becomes very intense. The fears you have, the worries you have will come to the forefront and ruin your decisions. To isiliye you see I am telling you pointedly self-awareness kise generate karna hai only this science will tell you. How to become deeply conscious and mindful of every situation not being carried away not like living in a dream yes I'm sure though living in a dream and yet being successful or that happens only in unreal unrealistic situations aki media pe hota hoga in your cinemas but not in real life. In real life you have to be mindful to be successful tatpar hone ke liye you require that mindfulness. So, this is one thing I wanted you to know and another thing is how we do it in yoga is through this selfed neuroplasticity you first you must understand the term neuroplasticity your very brain modifies changes as your learning changes so you can actually make your brain as you want through your learning through your experiences in life. It is sort of malleable plastic brain. So, ah jai se sanskar banaoge and the way you pattern your circuits according to that your brain will keep changing throughout your life you know. So, at the heart of patterning circuits, de-linking negative pathways and reinforcing neural pathways, you see the slide the heart of it is the art of generating good sanskars . So, all this your brain will function very positively . So, self directed neuroplasticity actually begins with the art of creating good sanskars . We will go into that again hm. So, you see every point which I am giving you it is of practical aid to you. Understand this how does your mind actually work? Your mind works through thoughts. Thought is nothing, but the fine expression of your vital energy. Now your thoughts you may be thinking of anything but it is in the form of a modification of your mind. You may be thinking of anything just now you are listening to this talk so your mind is modifying in a particular way Use modification ko ek naam dete hain yog mein usko kehte hain vritti toh aapka mann jo hai vrittiyon se banta hai the modifications of mind create thought or when you repeat these modifications they go into the subconscious and become what are called sanskars. Consciously what are you thinking? Maybe you are thinking something to do with your studies. It will become deep within you, it will become a sanskar, next time you read the same thing it is easier, hai na, so this is how your conscious thought process creates your mental impressions, deep mental impressions which are called sanskars and after some time this whole thing will fructify as memory. When it stays in the subconscious for a long time, it gets converted into your memories. After sometime it will again blossom as conscious thought. Your memories only become your thoughts again and again, isn't it? So, you see this is the cycle which yoga gives you. Bar bar hi aapke mann mein ho raha hai. this is the cycle which yoga gives you we will go deeper into this but fundamentally I want you to understand your mind is nothing but the modifications which have some content that content also has a name it is called pratyayi so vritti and pratyayi milke ek thought banate hain. Vritti or pratyayi milke ek thought banate hain. I will show you slides on that. And this is how your thought world is created through the modifications of your mind. Yes. Now, you are capable of a whole lot of states of mind, you are capable of many states of mind, abhi toh ekagra chitt me ho, I can see all of you are very concentrated because it is the first class, first hour hai, toh theek hai bahut concentration hai, but there are different states of mind which you experience also Shall I show you your states of mind? Yes, I have put them all together because I know what you think See, this is the first state of your mind This is called Chittabhumi theory in Yoga These are the states of your own mind First is called M dull and listless state. It means, Sunday morning, the state of mind, there are no classes, let's go to sleep. Wake up at 10 or 11, doesn't matter. So, that is called the dull and listless state. When your mind doesn't want to budge, that is called the dull and listless state, when your mind does not want to budge It is called the Muda Avastha, which means The mind has not even come to the level of conscious thought It is just listless It is also called the donkey mind This is called the Muda Avastha The next state is Which also you go into, it is the Kshipta Avastha is kshitva avastha where you are very restless, very agitated, thinking many thoughts and unable to even listen or sit quiet mind. See these are states you are passing through every day, please note. And the third state is what is called butterfly mind. it is jumping from one thought to another thought but it is a little preoccupied with each thought. It is flitting from one to another. That is why it is butterfly mind. So, you see in a developed state, you are unable to process new information because you are preoccupied with something. Now, if you watch a movie, you will have preoccupation about it for the next one week. New information is not coming in. There is a little resistance. This is called a deformed state. And it is a state of where the preoccupation with one particular thought is also brief. But apart from these three states where you are donkey, monkey and butterfly apart from these three states, ekagravasthavi hai, aap dekhiye this is the fourth state you are capable of where your mind is calm, attentive and controlled. So, this should be your default state. Agar successful hona ho to donkey monkey butterfly ko chodke ekagra avastha is normal to a healthy mind because it is not being carried away by some emotion, by silly thought process by some fear some anger no no this is not true. Healthy mind is focused, attentive, fully conscious, reverted. I think this should be closed and after focused state there is a deepened ekagraha avastha which is called nirudha avastha which is possible only through yoga. It is a super attentive state where you become super conscious and you are fully absorbed in whatever you do. It is a mastered state. You are the master of your mind in that state. It is awakened state usually it occurs in meditation. Those who have practice of meditation, some idea they will have for this Niruddha status where you are established in what you are doing the mind is not flitting here and there. See I have I have watched some top scientists at work. If they sit sit now they will get up after 12 they will get up only after 12 hours and they don't have the sense of time they are not hungry they are not thirsty, they are not at all distracted by anything work is done then they will get up And the sense of time oh 12 hours have passed I did not know . This is Nirudha state . If you enter these states if these are normal to you you know anything in this universe will be yours this is the secret of success but hum kya kare abhi to yeh first three states hi cross nahi kar pa rahe so Rajyog will train you towards this this is the chitta bhumi theory of yoga which is telling you the range of experience you are capable of just because you have not tasted nirudha state don't think it is not there I have seen scientists like this so take care you are capable of all this now where you invest your attention will decide which state will be dominant in you, if you are happy being a donkey monkey or butterfly okay no problem. Or agar usse utna hai aur ye states, apne default states banane hai, then you have to work a little. So, what exactly you have to work upon? Just see this. Why does the mind break into thoughts? Ye kyun hota hai? Why does the mind not remain riveted on what you want to study, what you want to grasp, why does it keep breaking into thought waves? If you have heard of Raman Maharshi, you are the ocean of stillness, you are not the waves of thoughts. Are you understanding this you are the an ocean of stillness pure awareness within you like ocean you are not the waves of thoughts but you get identified with them you get identified with your thoughts and that is why the mind breaks into vrittis. So, that is why it behaves like a monkey or a butterfly or like that. So, dekhiye, why does the mind break into vrittis? Please see this slide. Vrittis are modifications of your mind, hain na? hm. So, when you repeat them they generate sanskars, these again generate vrittis, the sanskars keep getting accumulated in the subconscious mind and generate our memories. There is no break to this cycle except through yoga, yoga it that is why by definition it is chitta vritti nirodh. This is your mental life vritti uth rahiye, repeat ho rahiye, sanskar ban rahiye, phir se vritti uth rahiye, repeat ho rahiye, sanskar ban rahiye, finally, vo sanskar ka poora vo jo packet of sanskar becomes your memory from that again vrittis are coming out like this it's called vritti sanskara yoga chakra in Vyasa Bhashya and Patanjali Yoga Sutras this is your mental life this is going on and on and on that is why you can't stop mind. Kuch na kuch hota hai hi rehta hai wahan par. Aap bhi dekh rahe ho, hum bhi dekh rahe hain. How conscious are you of what is happening in your mind? It's only due to this. Why does the mind break into thoughts? Because sense perceptions are there constantly, actions are going on and memories are unfolding from within and vrittis are getting created, sanskars are getting created, getting cycled, circulated so mind is always busy, mind never stops, has anyone ever stopped the mind? does anyone have the desire to do it or not? slow down a little, like you put the gear in the car, have you ever tried to put the gear here? You have to go uphill when you have to go downhill So you must understand you should handle your thought process Your thought process should not handle you Right? If my fear and my anger and my hatred started handling me, mera life kya hoga? Pure misery, unadulterated misery. This is actually the collapse of the the very human purpose. And isiliye becoming conscious of your thought process and understanding the mechanism of mind is so important. How are my thoughts created? What is thought basically? Vritti aur pratyay ka combination hai. To vritti jaise banti hi rehti hai mann mein, waise sanskar hote rehte hai, waise memories hote rehte hai, phir se wo vrittis ko, they will make your vrittis blossom all the time. So your mind is always on going on. Aapko pata even sleep according to yoga is a vritti. It is called that vritti which has abhav pratyay, which has nothing for a pratay that is sleep. It is very interesting which means what your mind is busy day and night. Isiliye the sense of exhaustion, ye jo thakkan and tired of mind ye hota hai na kabhi kabhi haan. See when you are going for getaways, it is only because you want to keep away from your mind. getaways it is only because you want to keep away from your mind your thought process Johanna it now good but curta a kibos is course toward a kinky challenge I yeah I'm Karna Chateau is the other Dubai Jana Chateau Singapore Jana Chateau and do you know people who find this unbearable walk a carlet a What do they do? Do you know where they shoot? Here. To stop this. A terrible situation can also come that I am not able to handle my mind. It doesn't stop. So, close it in any way. Suicides shoot themselves here. So, never be in such a situation that I hope he made a month a minute now watch me a key I can't stop this mechanism you can very well stop it that is what is yoga chit vritti can erode stopping the modifications of your mind it should be part and parcel of your life. Practice it for 5 minutes everyday. It will be so refreshing. Mind will become so refreshing and so balanced. You will feel what an idiot I was. Those who are idiotic never practice yoga. Because they have to go in some silly way with their stupid emotions. They have to go in some silly way with their stupid emotions they have to go in this way those who are really smart at once they will understand yes it is important to stall my mind stop this thought process a bit and see for what is going on and understand it, make it positive make it productive to your work so So, that is why you must understand this I will give you more knowledge on this because theory may a important see these are all the types of according to Rajyog which you are capable of Patanjali Yog Sutra has these things, right cognition, your cognitions, perceptions, misconceptions, imagination, sleep, memory, these are all vrittis, all of these are modifications of your mind. So this is going on day and night but there is no knowledge about it, that is why mind management is so difficult See this is hardcore theory from Patanjali Yoga Sutras And all of these generate your vrittis And vrittis when repeated become sanskars When they have become sanskarsars they are very difficult to overcome Have you seen this? Why can't we change our habits? Because they have become Sanskars It is very difficult to change habits Right? Now if I suddenly tell you that you have to wake up at 5 am from tomorrow It is next to impossible I know it. No one will do it because you study till 3 o'clock. So why you are not able to change a habit is because sanskars have so been created that it is not easy to change them. Those habits have vrittis aise repeat hua hai that you cannot suddenly change, isliye you must take care of what you concentrate upon consciously and make into a sanskar, kyunki vrittiyon se toh sanskar bante hai na, you are generating sanskars from your vrittis. So, your conscious thought process is focused here this becomes important if it is focused on the right things you will have very good sanskars if it is focused on all kinds of filthy things are sub available have to is this right it This is not a theory. It is happening with us day and night. So take care. The point in all this is you must understand the value of conscious thought process. What you think that you will become. How you think will generate your sanskars that is how your personality is formed and tomorrow your behaviors will be formed so don't think some magical thing will come and change and make everything successful for you no no no you have to focus on yourself you must understand how my mind is working and how do I generate the right cognitions, the right vrittis so that my sanskars are always good and reliable. Then only I will be a reliable ho. This is what happens. You must take conscious charge of things. Then only change is possible. Iske liye see all this theory is being given to you only to help you understand the value of conscious thinking, the value of the conscious thought process. Otherwise, it is really very difficult in life. I would like to ah give you one ah particular incident here to help you understand previously studied study Ekaagra and Niruddha state, what it will help you not achieve and if you have a hold over them your conscious thought process if you have a hold over it what you cannot achieve this real life incident is from the life of Vivekan, he was a master of this concentration he was such a master that's why such huge achievement so quickly in life you know how till what age he lived he lived only till 39 he passed away at 39 but he achieved so much,yu? Master of concentration. Master of this vrittis. Kaise master the vo pata hai? Ek baar vo Meerut me the. He was in Meerut. And he had gone there to recuperate his health. And with him was a brother disciple called Swami Akhandanand ji. Toh roj Vivekananda unko tell him to bring a book from the library So he was reading Sir John Lubock's works So everyday he used to bring a book and give it to him Everyday he was reading a book So when he used to go to return the book to the brother disciple in the library So the librarian asked him, what is your Swami? You read a book everyday? How is this possible? How is this possible? That everyday he reads one book. Everyday he is taking new volume. Then this person said, no, he reads, I have seen. So, then, no, no, he does not read. The librarian said, he must be reading something like this. This is not possible. This is not possible. So the brother disciple came and told Swami ji, Vivekananda ji, that he doesn't believe that you read. Then Vivekananda told him, okay, wait. One day, while strolling, he reached the library, and then he met the librarian and he said, I read a volume daily, if you don't have faith you can ask me whatever you want from, he had read 8 volumes till then, so ask me anything from those books, so then he brought a random book, there on a random page he just asked something to Swamiji and you know Swamiji gave him the exact what was written on that page. He asked something from there and Swamiji verbatim quoted what was there. He said Swamiji this is superhuman. How is this possible? Then Swamiji explained and you please pay attention to this explanation Vivekananda said you see when a child studies the alphabet first he studies only A B C D then he learns to put the alphabets together and read the word, A for apple, A P P L E is apple, fir wo apple dekhta hai fir associate karta hai, this word means this, hai na. So, you see now letter he has learned to join the letters and understand the word and its meaning. Then Vivekananda said gradually as he grows up he becomes older he learns to associate words together like this and understands the sentence immediately. As his brain develops further he will join sentences together like this and understand the paragraph immediately and gradually as he becomes more and more capable and a magnificent intelligence is produced he will glance through the page and get the whole page in a few seconds I do this with books Swamiji ne ka, I do this with books aise books, he glances at it and he soaks up the information entirely and doesn't miss it, he doesn't lose it from his memory, how is this possible you tell me this is the power of attention, he is able to pay such total attention, ki like jaise sponge so karta hai na pani ko, waise hi soaking in the information. And fir that librarian said, Swamiji ye to super human ability hai, Swamiji ne kaha nahi, anybody can do it who has trained his mind and it also requires purity of mind a though cheesy and this is possible. So, you see this is the remarkable capacity of your mind to gather information like this, gather knowledge like this and retain it not lose it, but only if it is totally concentrated and riveted if your attention remains riveted, then this is possible. If attention is flitting from object to object to object, this is not possible. Today's age very difficult to rivet attention because of your mobile phones. But you know this phone which I use is always on silent mode. Only at definite hours of the day I check for my messages and I answer them not all the time if you want to keep your attention totally scattered sab kuch open rakhna is me and if you want to be very purposeful and meaningful have fixed hours for seen seeing your messages practical tips I am giving you you must learn the art of fixing attention on your goals and you will not move much from there, then only you will succeed. Or iske liye iske liye chahiye totally committed will that I will achieve this in life and a hold over your thought process consciously cognitions your misconceptions imagination sleep memory some amount of consciousness must be invested into that which means you have become deeply aware within then your vrittis and your sanskars will start working for you meditation is the purpose of this to make you more and more deeply aware so that your attention remains riveted we are going to study what is the connection between your attention and your awareness between your vritti, sanskar and attention we are going to study this but this background you should know before I proceed further vritti ko repeat karne se kya hota hai sanskar bante hai now you must have theoretical knowledge about sanskar also because it is so very very very practical to your life. See this now we start the mechanics of attention. What is sanskar or mental impression? It is strong mental impression created by repeated conscious thought or vrittis. It is the building block of life and character you know Vivekananda used to say you are nothing but the bundle of your Sanskars, character is nothing but the bundle of Sanskars Sanskar is like the character, we are not talking some theory from some book this is the everyday reality of our lives is a less on scar up a hot to me have cases on scar Bonateau Jesse up key Vritti Hogi where say some scar Banega you got this formula repetition of Vritti creates your son scars so conscious thought should be so good so positive so elevated kia chase on scarkari bane. Tomorrow when you will be heads of institutions and big managers and big engineers and all that, you must understand this principle fundamentally in life ki exposures are matter. The type of intake you take that matters in your life for the creation of your sanskars kyuki vrittis are created by what you take in from the senses and by your memories unfolding so in sab cheezon ke liye you require good exposures isn't it you require good memories so take care of this entire thing Vritti Sanskar Chakra Jo hai how to generate good sanskars through action and conscious thought this is actually the heart of behavioral psychology, but you know I teach psychology in some universities. Wah par ye idea hi nahi hai because yog ke saath inone connection nahi kiya hai abhi They have not understood in-depth human psychology They are working on superficial behavior Is it enough to modify behavior? I may be very good to you but from inside I am like What kind of a person is he? What is he doing? He doesn't listen to me. What's the point? If you want authenticity in life, your thought, word and action should match Right? This is called Sajjan and word and action should match. So, for that fundamentally they should be of the nature of positive and good. Good element should be there in your sanskar then only your character will naturally be good. So, your behavior is good not that you your polishing behavior and trying to make an impact you can never make an impact like that . The impact of a personality only comes when the entire personality is integrated within itself . A inner integrity is most important when your thought, action and emotion match, then what you say will be impactful. You do not require to impress anyone, naturally isko isiko charisma kehte hain. So, in sab cheezon ke liye this generation of the right sanskar is very very important this is part of the mechanics of attention. Sanskars manifest from the subconscious in all these ways you see a job presuppose state that is the unmanifested latent state just sanskar manifest me but show me up the code a presuppose state of Sanskars. Other means it has started manifesting. So young children around the age of 5 and 12 it has started manifesting. Which means fully blown youth. but through yoga you can change this manifestation when you practice yoga the Sanskars enter the Tanu state which is an attenuated state, meaning they are thinning out only the positive is manifested negative is thinning out. Nirudha state is when they are well controlled the negative sanskars, unko manifest hone ka chance hi nahi mil raha hai because you have controlled them and dagdha bija vastha these are high yogic states when they are actually burnt away the negative sanskars. So, anger, hatred, lust, greed all this are sanskars which can actually topple your character unless they are understood, identified and cleaned up. So, that is why sanskars manifesting from the subconscious it is important to understand this. This will ultimately define your character and from your character actually should come your behavior and behavior is not the proof of character, character is the proof of behavior. Is not this true, Jo may carry you? So, catch all these points and I will go further into the mechanics of attention in the next class, we will just stop here.
 Thank you. Om Asato Maa Sadgamaya Tamaso Maa J Amritam Gamaya Om Shanti Shanti Shanti See he asked a very interesting question more light on sanskars can it be possible that our vrittis are not good but sanskars are okay no no no no from the beginning your vrittis have generated your sanskars according to yoga psychology aap jai se consciously soch stain that becomes important and sanskars a yoga may they are studied in thoroughly in a big way see at least your grandparents at home must be telling you you must have good sanskars achhya sanskar chaiye aur iske liye karo wo karo kitne saare mechanisms invent kiye and do this and that for this so many mechanisms have been invented which have brought good values in children it is natural in this culture so all this is meant not to restrict your freedom or to dominate upon your freedom or anything like that it is only meant to generate certain traits in you to give birth to some values like that it is only meant to generate certain traits in you could Sanskaroko janam de le ke liye wo sab banaya gaya hai toh isiliye if you understand this you will yourself adopt it so that is why I am giving you all knowledge of sanskasi without all this knowledge you cannot handle your attention although that is all you need without understanding the background. Kyuki aapka mann jo hai na, that is the sheet or you can say the substratum, the foundation upon which your attention is built. Agar wo foundation hi aisa, it's not functioning properly, how will you build attention on that? Isliye ye Vritti Sanskar yes sir you must pay attention to it this is the groundwork stabilizing the chitta then building attention building focus people who are very agitated in mind can they build focus tell, can they hold attention on anything? We do not have to go anywhere, sometimes our mind will behave in such a way impossible to stop it or control it. So, you cannot build attention at that moment. So, that is why I am giving you all of this knowledge connected attention see. Now you see the next slide will tell you all the types of sanskars, your impulses, your knowledge based thoughts, desire based thoughts, effects of actions, even the sleep, nirodh sanskar jo kehte hain and of course, the higher experiences of life, spiritual experiences all of these have been given different names of sanskars, these are all sanskars. So, your impulses are called kleshas, then there are vidya sanskars, ab ab jo padte ho na, wo sab bhi vritiya srishti karta hai hai na, it is going becoming your sanskar. So, next class it is easier to do all this work because you have created the sanskars required. So, that they are called vidya sanskars, then there are bhog sanskars all emotion related experiences vrittis becomes bhog sanskars. Then karma shayi jo hai which is the effect of action any action you perform it will have its impact on your mind. So, usse bhi sanskar hote hain jisko karma shay kehte hain. Then nirodh sanskar are there when there is no special activity or thought then also a kind of abhav pratyay is there. The content of the vrittis there is no actual content. So, that is called a nirodh sanskar. Then spiritual experience based sanskar are there bhakti praj a nirodha sanskar. Then spiritual experience based sanskars are there bhakti, prajna all these are higher sanskars. So, whole lot of sanskars are there in human life. Now, depending upon your conscious thought a particular sanskar will grow. Apne mann kaha par lagaya? Application of mind and conscious thought process are the most important things that is why will grow will grow will grow and if you actually have get higher awareness through yoga practice and all that, pragnya sanskar will grow. So depending upon where you invested vital energy and your thought, your sanskars go on growing in your system. So that is why who makes our sanskars? We make it ourselves. No one else makes it. system. To isiliye kaun banata hai hamare sanskar? Hum khudi banate hain. Aur koi nahi banata. You are responsible for your life and destiny. Please know this. Don't blame it on anybody. Tomorrow you know when you grow up you will have a number of people to blame. Iski wajah se ye hua, inki wajah se wo hua. No, no, no. The fact of the matter is you alone are responsible for your mind to keep up near a kiss and scar create K through your conscious thought process where you applied your mind how conscious you became and where you used your thought energy will decide what kind of sense causears you create. Isile Vivekananda kehte the you are the creator of your destiny. Be aware of your thoughts. Your thoughts really make you what you are. Main unhi ko quote kar rahi hoon. Take care of what you think for your thoughts will create you. Your thoughts create your destiny. So, no use blaming a parent, teacher, government, no use, wo sach nahi hai. Self-development module you must learn the importance of self-knowledge and how responsible you must be for your own life. See, this is giving you this wealth of knowledge about your own mind. Yes sir constricted I hum could eat occur rain Hannah depending upon where you expose yourself what are the learning what kind of learning you have what are your perceptions what have been your cognitions, where did you invest emotion, your sanskars get created accordingly, what action you performed, what friends you made, what associations you made, padhai mein mann laga rayo ya wahan bahar jaake having fun, accordingly will be your marks, accordingly will be your sanskars. Importance of taking charge of our mind this is what they are telling us you create your vrittis and sanskars. So, have proper thought mechanism, proper thinking, positive thinking and positive feelings, isiliye service is part of life. Achhe kaam karna, achhe bhaav man mein rakhna, it is not option, it is part and parcel of a good life. If you want a really good, great life, you will make this part of your life. Aapke sanskar aap khudi banate ho. Then let us zoom into a single thought. What is one thought? You see from the point of the mechanics of thinking of yoga psychology, now we have gone into one thought. Aap dekhe yaha par you will understand the concepts of vritti and pratyayi very clearly. have gone into one thought . The mental fluctuation modification of your mind is what is called vritti . That is the modification your mind is undergoing, but the content is maybe you are thinking of your home, you are thinking of your house. So, us content ko pratyay kehte hai. Now in any thought there is a modification due to the pratyay, due to the content of your thought. If you are thinking of physics, aapka mann ek tarah se modify hua. Suddenly you remembered you fought with your friend, immediately modified because the pratyaya changed. The pratyaya became you fought with your friend, I will take revenge. So it changed because your pratyaya changed. So the modification of your mind changed. So, the content of your vritti is pratyayi together they make one thought. Now, we are going very deep into your mind, ek thought kaise banta hai, aise banta hai. What is the content of your thinking will create the modifications of your mind. So, when you have very erratic modifications going on in mind, you must understand your content is not good good enough. Aapko pata hai jab aap violent cheezes cheeze dekhte hoon ya you are indulging in something which is very violent and negative, your mind will become very agitated and restless. Even babies you can they have tracked this. Baby ke mind me bhi a scene of violence will put it into agitation and wo rote rone lagta hai. So, you see your vrittis are getting modified as per your pratyay, the content of your thought. So, how should your content be? Now, if you want calm vrittis, ab aapko wo you do not want donkey mind, monkey mind, butterfly mind, you want ekagra state and niruddha state. So, then what should be the content of your vritti? It should be something noble, something positive, something good enough worthy of you Are you understanding? See nobody will give you this analysis in today's world I am telling you What you will get in these classes, this is absent from today's world That is why things are functioning the way they are If you don't understand yourself first, how will you manage the world tell me sab ke baare mein gnaan hai, khud ke baare mein kuch gnaan hi nahi hai, that's okay for most people, chalta hai jaise by the time you're 50 you'll go into depression jab khud ke baare mein hi koi gnaan nahi hai, kabhi samjha hi nahi, what I am about what this mechanism is, what this mind is how will you handle other people properly so clashes will be unavoidable unless you train your mind so you see this is how your thought is working as per your vritti and pratyayi you radiate vital energy prana but I have a niche a kaj image if you are thinking positive thoughts is kamata be pratyayi be bahut achi hai vritti accordingly modifies into something very beautiful you will radiate positive aura achche bhav niklenge sharir me se bhi niklenge because because mind and body are united. So, your aura is totally decided by your thought process. What do you radiate? If you are trying to impact society, you must first become so very positive and you can say the the charisma required for making changes comes only by this when you are able to understand identify and correct every thought make it powerful as a positive thoughts now they are like weapons you must have heard of stories about this they thought and it happened so how it happened because the thought became creates everything for you. You know your environment also, since you radiate that level of pran through your thought, the environment you create around you, the surroundings, the circumstances, all are consciously or unconsciously created by you. Jab you know they say jab rebirth hota hai na when the soul takes a body ab hum sab ek sharir mein aaye hai na how does it choose that which body it will come which family it will come according to this resonance. J of subtle body which means mental makeup according to that type of body, circumstance, family he gets because there you know you are not going to choose and select and all that but it should match your resonance. So make your thought process very positive, very good, aligned. There you will see the vrittis are going at a constant fluctuation. Hain na? At least itna aana chahiye humare life mein. Pratyay same hai wahaan par. So this is a concentrated mind. Lekin this is not our normal state. You know, want to see our normal state? Yes. Let me start from the normal. Yes. See this is your normal state, every thought is different from the previous thought, thought of some garden. So this is called the ordinary mind which has not yet learnt to concentrate. Gradually you start producing you see now see what I have written under that. Unstable vrittis plus dissimilar pratyayis is the ordinary mind clear but if you have stable vrittis and occasionally dissimilar pratyayis now you are bringing mind into focus iska matlab hai aapne jo pratyayi hai jo content of vritti hai usko ab ab limit karte ja rahe ho then you manufacture stable vrittis and similar pratyayis which means same pratyay agar chalega eki taraki vritti mein then it is called a focused mind or concentrated mind and non fluctuating vrittis rising and falling at same point and same pratyayis what is called the meditative mind. So a lot of information from Patanjali Yog Sutras has been condensed into this slide. Wo jo pages pages pages mein keh rahe hain, wo ek slide mein aapko mene nika diya. What is the ordinary mind? What is the mind coming into focus? What is the focused mind or the concentrated mind and what is the meditative mind? All dependent only on your vrittis and pratyayis. To ye jo pratyay ekatanata hai iska matlab hai maintaining one pratyay it is to be practiced to get concentrated and meditative mind, otherwise always content of thought is means which means only thought is flitting from one object to another your thought is moving. Aise mind mein concentration nahi aata hai, isiliye yog, learning the art of putting attention on one single thing alone, doos you see the way to generate a concentrated mind is through the power of attention. Attention helps you to generate stable vrittis and similar pratyayas thus building focus. Attention is nothing, but your awareness come to the forefront and the receding of your thought process. The rise of awareness to the forefront is the culmination of the initial meditative practice. With more practice attention gets reverted. This is the heart of yoga. See let me explain this a bit, hamare mind mein vrittiya chalti rehti hai, uska tara tara ke content hota hai us vritti ka, so pratyay is always different, so your mind is restless thinking of many things at a time, as you go on concentrating pratyay will get limited to one pratyay and vrittis will modify in the same manner you understand so same type of vrittis and same pratyay then you are coming into deep focus as you deepen this there will be only one vritti not even moving at the same point rising and falling same point with the same pratyay now what has happened your stupid thought process hazar cheezon ke bare mein ek saath sochna that has gone to the background and awareness has come to the forefront. You have become deeply conscious and attentive now thought process has gone to the background awareness has come to the forefront only when you attain this you will understand how stupid I was you will naturally think like that. Your silly worries, fears, unproductive memories and passions all this carry away your energies. You see it will help you build attention. when this state is achieved, now what has happened? Awareness has come to the forefront and thought has receded, iska matla ye nahi ki aap so gaye, no no no, you have become deeply conscious but thought process is under control, it is in the background background you have become deeply aware so attention definition is nothing but a beam of your awareness directed by your will attention definition is according to yoga psychology it is a beam of your awareness directed by your will to awareness forefront may not come, then how will the attention build up? That is why you must practice yoga so that this carried away being carried away by thought process stops that is why it is so important. You become more aware than identified, you become more conscious than stupid and you will become very very attentive at that point. So, the very definition of attention by definition, attention is power of attention, attention is a steady beam of your mental awareness generated by your will and it is through the power of attention that you focus and concentrate your mind. Waha jo pehla picture diya gaya hai, it is the concentrated attentive mind now focused you can you know you can do delicate eye surgery with laser the most delicate surgery attention so you can do anything the most delicate things of life will be very easy for you or attention second picture just a whole no beam at all utterly scattered. Then even if you give 24 hours a day to the task you are performing nothing will happen, nothing serious will happen in your life. So, power of attention you must understand and the ability to build attention, bring it like this into focus. This is something this is the purpose of this course, no use just knowing a few concepts. Now, you will generate that level of attention in these classes and you will apply them further on. Ye hum practice karenge lekin theory mein aap ye jaan lo. See nobody will give you this definition of attention. You know kaise definitions dete hain psychology mein attention ke. Ability to remove other things from the mind. That is not enough. Positively, what is it from the first person standpoint, what what is it? It is nothing but your own mental awareness come into complete fruition and focus and directed by your will. So attention depends on your willpower. So the undercurrents of attention then that also you. So, the undercurrents of attention then, that also you should know, the undercurrents of attention will be your awareness and your will. If awareness is not there in the mind, only your silly thought process is going on, attention cannot be built. If will is not there to build attention, attention cannot be built. If will is not there to build attention, attention cannot be built. So, these are the undercurrents of attention. So, take charge of yourself and also you should remember there is no point in learning attention, concentration all this if you cannot focus it on worthy goals. You know Hitler was very concentrated guy Hitler What happened to that concentration? So if you don't have good sanskars, then better not build concentration Only if you have worthy sanskars and a very pointed mind you will really do good this is a mechanism that you will get if you do it but the groundwork should be very good the foundation upon which you build attention you must possess good sanskars fundamentally in life then on that you build everything isiliye achche chizhe dekhna, achche kaam karna, good exposures, good reading, good habits in life right now you make it part and parcel of your life tabhi this level of attention will really help you this is yogic attention you know, otherwise ultimately you will focus this attention on something silly. So, isiliye remember awareness and its investment in your thought process, iska matlab bohot ghera hai, abhi hum usme nahi jayenge, but at least you should know this, awareness and will are the undercurrents of your attention, these 2 must come to the forefront in your mind and your thoughts of fear, anger, hatred, whatever that should recede, that you should try to obliterate as far as possible possible then attention can be built up to this level because by definition it is nothing but the it is your mental awareness directed by your will it's a beam of your mental awareness now if you actually watch the practical scenario you will see most people only know thoughts awareness ke baare mein ut only know thoughts they have no idea about awareness, they have not even heard of it Have you heard of it? So much discussion about awareness? No, you haven't heard of it We are only identified with thought but what is it that enlivens your thought? It is awareness, that is why your thought means something to you. Aap dekhi aapka mental mechanism aise hi kaam kar raha hai. Now your job is to bring awareness to the forefront and put thought behind. Meditation ka yahi maqsad hai. You become more aware than identified with the thought process. When you are able to do this, attention will peak. Peak attention means peak performance in anything. So, uska mechanics ye hai. Now, how do we actually apply this? I can give you any number of examples for this state. Example dene se wo Rayta a you know there is another incident of this kind of a complete yogic concentration Vivekananda life metal bohot up milling a bar Belur mutt may encyclopedia Britannica Kulakar be SI a considerate a Swamiji a kick them make a volume Padre so somebody told him that how can you his own disciple actually he had come and he asked him that Swamiji how have you read so many volumes so quickly Swami ji said you please ask me whatever you want and he asked and Swami ji in the same capacity verbatim he is saying what is written there how is it possible to read it once capacity verbatim bol rahi hai wahan par kya likha hai ek baar padhne se yeh kaise sambhav hai by the power of attention by the power of attention see when you actually are in a completely attentive state you will lose sense of time and space yeh hua hai aapke life mein Has this ever happened in your life? Sometimes, it happens rarely That it happens It has a name ah there is a huge study of this process especially awareness attention their connection it is being studied the world over . The insight I am giving you is the insight of yoga psychology , they are studying it as they call it flow it is a it is a word coined by Zik Mihali Mihali Zik Mihali, he has coined this word called flow which means you are wrapped in some object on something you are studying or anything and you lose sense of time and space spontaneously. Kabhi kabhi music sunte yeh hota hai na, you got so totally involved in the music that you forget how much time you played, how much you ate, you don't remember anything When you are playing a game in chess, you forget naturally You are totally reverted because you have to win So there are states in your everyday life where you experience this flow When naturally time and space drop and your attention becomes unmoving . Now, the point is you must learn to generate flow even when there is no challenge . Because flow is considered a it is actually a function between challenges and skills. If you are very skillful in something and as there is a real challenge in front of you flow is generated. Dekha hai mathematical problems ko tackle karne ke samay this happens. Real challenging situation and you are skilled enough then you completely you will dive into it. So if you are able to generate flow without even a challenge that is yoga which means this is your normal state of mind where your attention remains on the object does not flip from there whatever you are doing tell me what will stop your success in life so that is why the power of attention is the secret of success. There is a book called 7 Habits of Highly Effective People. Stephen Covey, I do not know how many of you have read it you will see any successful person has this capacity for unmoving attention he is absolutely committed he does not move from there so unless that state is manufactured generated maintained continuously you will lose this capacity after a few years. Yoga you have to do it within 30 years they say the higher reaches of yoga because they are only showing you the highest reaches of your own consciousness. Let me tell you one more thing with age this capacity goes. If you miss it, you have missed it for life. Are you seeing the seriousness of it? Only in this age you can do it. After this age it it it will ripen if you have manufactured it correctly, otherwise it is difficult. So, practice now is important. This is part and parcel of your entire study process better attention better study it's not another thing or a course a credit career don't have such silly ideas it's part and parcel of studies Jitna attention manufacture karege utni achi padayi hogi now next what I'm going to teach you is the actual process of Patanjali Yoga The states of dharana, dhyana and samadhi Do you want to know in detail about it? Then only I will do it, otherwise I won't do it You must know in detail about it what is this? the highest reaches of your own mind and of your attention this is what they are going to tell you and by that this is actually called Samyama which means meditation, meditation and Samadhi on a single object once you get an idea about this Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi on a single object Once you get an idea about it You will know what you are capable of And then you will understand the donkey mind and monkey mind How silly it is to live like that You will not go to that side yourself There is no need to speak Don't distract yourself, pay attention. You will not need to say anything. Once you understand this, the science of yoga is actually telling you, every mind can do this. This is not a special capacity. What is special is, the Sanskars should be special. This is not a special capacity What is special is the sanskar should be special Sanskar should be such that this science is considered important And then any mind can do it In our life, we are ordinary people in our life at least we must practice in such a way we are able to generate the state which will give us whatever we want in life. Yogi ho jaise dhyan mein bet ke rena that may not be our intention, but the state of mind required for the highest attention for meditation that you must be able to manufacture otherwise you are missing life I am telling you. This distracted state is no life, jitna mind distracted hoga utna you are wasting vital energy in the concentrated states of higher awareness you will understand the meaning and beauty of life see jo aap abhi aap aap ke andar energy hai na vital energy usko agar double kar de aapko kaise lagega all the more alive all the more aware double of life experience you will get, isn't it? In fact, you are trying to do that through the senses, but usse nahi hota hai, very sorry. You are trying to increase life by more sense exposure, more sense titillation, but uske dwara nahi hota hai, wo hota possible if you double the level of your vital energy You will have a better, double the experience of life Far more vitality So this is only possible through yoga That is why we are teaching you how to enhance life Not how to run away from life, yoga is not about that How to enhance life you enhance your life energy you will become more alive in mind more vitality greater attention bigger chunk of life you will have so this is what the science entirely is about you must remember this whoever has practiced yoga in the right way has found not just concentration and focus but you have found deeper happiness in life how are they related concentration lagaya how does it make me automatically more happy? You know, awareness and happiness are related. There is a equation. Happiness is an exponential function of your awareness. The more aware you are from within, more clarity will be in the mind, so higher will be your degree of happiness and more cluttered the mind, lesser the awareness, the lesser the happiness. Is this true? Through Yoga, the same state is being enhanced tremendously The state of uncluttered, clarified awareness So you see, it is not some supernatural state It is clarifying your awareness It is decluttering your mind So don't attribute it to some supernatural element Forget all the miracle mongering in the name of yoga Occultism, all sorts of practices, miracle mongering, forget all of it Vivekananda's Rajyog is a purely scientific discipline It's a science Science means that I will get it if I do it, you will get it if you do it discipline it's a science science ka matlab kya hai main karungi toh bhi mujhe milega aap karoge toh bhi aapko milega it is available to everyone if they do it correctly and it is available anywhere because it's a universal law of life you do it in America also you should get it you do it in Himalaya also you should get it you should do it correctly ye cheez hai so the magic of You do it in Himalaya also you should get it. You should do it correctly. So the magic of yoga is it is the science of your consciousness. It is showing you the highest reaches of human consciousness. Explore it like that and don't go into any other kind of occultism regarding yoga only as a science hum log usko study karenge it is a science I told you Vivekananda said it is the rationale of all your practices and worship and finally, it is tremendous. It is not just about building focus and attention, it will give you such an amount of joy, happiness and stability in life that you are they tell you how this is happening. It is only because your mind has been brought into a very stable state. Awareness has become dominant. Thought process has see thought can be of various kinds isn't it? If thought recedes, your awareness is dominant and perpetual, you are assured of happiness, then whether there is anger, hatred, worry, whatever cause for whatever, you will remain in a very balanced state. So, this is the beauty of yoga when it is practiced and how it is related to happiness I told you the more the awareness in your system the greater the happiness it is not synthetic joy synthetic joy you know you need this object to be happy that person to be happy that is synthetic joy this yoga is original joy awareness ka pure joy hai woh to cheezi alag hai agar aap miss out kar lo then you know your your discretion your discrimination will be only very limited between two small lines pleasure and non pleasure that's all such a small idea of happiness you will have there is a huge range of happiness available to you a talk a ladder of happiness it is also IIT talk ladder of happiness NRCV . So, it will tell you there is a range of happiness available to you only if your awareness comes to the forefront if you lead a stupid donkey life then your only joy will be ah ah ah ah addictions this will be your only level of joy you become addicted only when you don't have real joy in life then you fall for pleasure you know that true see everything I am telling you is true when you do not have real joy in life you will fall for pleasure and addictions so up now I say no that's the message of Bhagavad Gita uddhared atmana atmanam you lift yourself by yourself from all these states in order to get the real taste of life where you are not dependent on people and objects to keep you happy isn't it a wonderful thing mujhe koi nahi chahiye mujhe sukhi rakhne ke liye it's a wonderful thing to say I am happy by myself. So, this is only possible if awareness comes to the forefront thought recedes and attention is built to this level. So, that is why I am telling you everything in your life is related to yoga. If that is missing, yoga is missing, life is missing, life is missing. Just gathering a hundred thoughts and concepts and connections is not enough, that is not called learning. That is vritti jnana, that is important for survival, to earn money, to work in this world, very important. But for your happiness, your balance, balance your stability you require this knowledge self-knowledge so that is why now we will plunge into the heart of this what is called Samyama in yoga which is actually understanding the states of dharana, dhyana and samadhi but you know precondition is very huge for this so I have to say that because in classical yoga it is not given in this way you have to satisfy those conditions so what is precondition? It is a long path it's called Ashtang yoga, at the end of Ashtang me aapko dhyaan dharana dhyaan and sabadi milegi. So, Ashtang Yog kya hai? It starts with Yam and Niyam, fundamental disciplines for a good life, ye hi keh rahe hai wo. So, I will go into this a little more when we actually I wanted to do this in your guided meditation class that you get a good conception of this, this entire thing, yam and niyam. Lekin mujhe pata nahi ab wo class kab ho raha hai, I really do not know because we are we are short of time just now. So I will just give you some some basic ideas about this, these disciplines and then we will go into the main thing . So, you see they are social observances or ethical disciplines actually has classified them under ahimsa ahimsa is non-violence a non-violent attitude of mind is important. Aapko is level of attention manufacture karne ke liye, maine kaha na agar Hitler andar baitha ho, no use building attention. Better you remain distracted, so that you would not cause so much havoc at least. So, ahimsa should be a fundamental trait for the yogi. Fir satya truthful, see if you are not truthful in speech in thought you will not reach the truth it is so simple, kuki vahi mind to reach karne wala hai, if that mind is giving out false output how will it touch the truth, so satya very important discipline. The third discipline is Brahmacharya. See don't get frightened by this. The whole point is vital energy to be kept at a certain level. That is Brahmacharya, which means you keep your vitality in your hands. You don't give it in the hands of other people. So a certain amount of purity in life this is the actually the essence of social disciplines you know social observances that there is self control in the person. Fir asteya which is a non stealing and non covetousness, non stealing, not asking for others possessions, no greed basically hm and then a parigraha which is non expectation of gifts from others, kyuki it compromises your energy you know vitality. So, these are some of the observances of yama, then it is niyam. Niyama means shoucha which is purity again of body and mind then santosha these are all personal observances please see santosha is contentment of mind then you have tapas austerity a spirit of yoga karne ke liye thoda you must be very willful about it. If you have all these excuses, then it is not possible. So, there should be a spirit of penance. Then, I told you about Santosh. A feeling of inner contentment is required for the practice of yoga which means you must study scriptures a bit good some of you are doing it what will happen is your mind will be raised to a particular level by doing that. So, Swadhya is important and Ishwar Pranidhan which means you take refuge in God, you believe in a supreme power which will help you in this path. So, all these are helpful, these are fundamental practices for before you start all this Samyama you know. So, ye cheezein they should be inbuilt in us, this is the fundamental requirement. Uske baad hai asan, asan means the ability to sit, maine pehle hi keh diya 2 ghante betna padega, if you are prepared come for the course and you must be able to sit still up still a better you must be develop the capacity of remaining still you know why initially that will still your mind also. If you practice stillness of body stillness of mind will come naturally if the body itself is very restless mind will become restless so asan is that comfortable position where you can maintain stillness for long periods of time Padmasan is also possible, you can sit on chair also but stillness is quietness is awareness you will become naturally conscious so asana is very important, I have seen it myself, you know anywhere we sit if you sit absolutely still but fully conscious, still does not mean that you are not like this, fully still and fully conscious if you sit you will reach these states naturally Then pranayam, pranayam to hapko sikhayenge when we have the guided meditation I will teach you the simplest form of two pranayams, one is for yoga practice one is for your general health, physical and mental health Anulom Vilom I will teach you and Brahmari Pranayam I will teach you and then we have the practice of Pratyahar which means you withdraw your mind from other things in order to concentrate on one thing See just now here in this room if you are thinking of a glass if this is going on so stopping this, withdrawing your mind from other things and concentrating bringing it to concentrate on one object so this pratyahara till here it should be a practice for you to enter into dharana and then dhyana and then samadhi so these five things yama, niyama, asana, pranayama and pratyahara this should be part and parcel of life. This is part of life. Then easily you can attain to this level of attention and concentration. So after this only begins the three states of dharana, dhyana and samadhi. These are very powerful states. Aapko pata nahi hai. Even just dharana, not to speak of samadhi and all that. Sirf dharana agar ho jaye mann mein kisi ek object ke upar, you will generate tremendous power in your system just dharana and if you come to dhyan if it actually you are getting absorbed in the object in a deep way and you have become fully aware that is a tremendous state to attain or samadhi to it is complete absorption in the object . So, these are all spectacular states of very deepened awareness and absolute attention. Even a bit of this will give you tremendous power or in your personality, it will give you the focus you require for success, it will make you a real man, otherwise distracting and running after this and running after that, will make you something you know you will stand apart from the crowd it is through yoga that most people have realized Vedanta you must understand this yoga shabda upanishad may be aata hai vedanta jog dhyan humko deta hai hume batata hai it is about the nature of your being the self it is possible through this yog mechanism of yog. So, that is why this is actually the purpose of yog is that transcendental knowledge the knowledge of the self, but it puts out so many positive effects in our life that you can use them in your journey in life. So, that is why we are studying it. So, before I enter Samyama, I want to tell you that the satisfaction of these few principles assures your entry into Samyama and without this you will falter there. Many people do not succeed in yoga yoga matlab was if a son a which a cross and or a awesome or was and was a physical joy exercises joe bolte hey it is only meant to stabilize your body and to heal certain things in your body but the yoga which we are going to talk about the Raj Yoga, the principles of mind management and attention, this is the real yoga, these are the higher reaches of yoga where your awareness itself is being brought into complete fruition, into complete manifestation. So isko hone ke liye for this to happen in the system, you must be established in this, ye precondition I cannot proceed without that. At least when you are taking this course be very concentrated about these things and actually when we do the practical you will practice some of these things. You must always remember those who take up this path they are taking it up with very clear discretion or discrimination Why did you take it? Rajyoga Very good Rajyoga to practice Because I want something of this knowledge Because it is science of my own life If I know what is happening on Jupiter and Saturn And what is Voyager doing But I don't know what is happening in my own system What is the point What is happening in my mind How to control that mind I have no idea about this is happening in my own system what is the point may remain a cow or a loose man coca control can I is a bar a me a koi idea knee or walk wazars kaka rain was a bar a mesa by Diaz hey what is the point of this I'm asking you so learn to manage your system first up me up my stabilize hojo then you go on your exploratory road the infinite ocean of knowledge will be open before you because you will not have silly distractions and your vitality will be beaming may kati on a present vital energy will get doubled so how will be your experience of life a be jitna enthusiasm a just not adrenaline release hora hai in all your excitement of life in all your excitement of life if that gets doubled that will be that is what yoga does your vitality just mounts so easily but the preconditions you should remember if you do not follow some of these moral disciplines and if you do not understand the value of pratyahar and all this, it will not happen in the system. So take care of this and I will go, I will proceed to the next slide. Oh, time is up already. Time is already up. I will just take 2 minutes. I will come to this slide again tomorrow. So, do not worry. Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi have been put into one slide just for you to comparatively study the three states Itna easy nahi hai inko samajhna but comparatively unko samajhne ke liye aise diya gaya hai and I am using a particular paradigm I meditating on an object say the object is Om so dharana kisko kehte hain usme dhyan kisko kehte hain and samadhi kisko kehte hain this we will be studying we will take it up tomorrow don't worry I will come back to the same slide and show you many more slides so that you get a thorough knowledge of yoga we will stop here because time is up. Thank you.
 Thank you. Om Asato Maa Sadgamaya Tamaso Maa Jyotir Gamaya So, today's session we are going to study Samyama mainly, which is the heart of yoga because dharana, dhyana and samadhi are the most important limbs of yoga. So, last class I gave you just an introduction to what it is about isn't it and apne ashtang yog dekh liya there are eight limbs to that but these last three limbs are the most important ones because what happens due to Samyama the Jayat Prajnalokah Patachalyok Sutra says which means when you become accomplished in these three limbs you will get the knowledge of what is called Prajna higher awareness will dawn knowledge of pure consciousness . So, we will go into this , but before that I want some clarity from you clear understanding of yoga and this scheme . You must be very clear about it. I want that clarity from you. So why are we doing this yoga? Why exactly are we doing yoga? Not just for the physical exercises for healthy body, not just for that. The reason we are doing it is we want the mind to reach the highest state of consciousness. We want the mind to unfold its entire potential. We want complete attention, we want to manufacture that and we want that our mind should not be carried away by negativities and all kinds of thoughts . So, that is why we are doing yoga the the very essence of yoga . Not just to get a little health, well you can get it even by your jog, morning jog. So, there is a high purpose to yoga. The purpose of yoga should be very clear in your mind. See in yoga we always say yoga philosophy, mind what is consciousness? See, if M is equal to T plus C, thoughts plus consciousness, M is mind, mind is equal to thoughts plus consciousness, then what is consciousness? It should be mind minus thoughts, is't it? Yeh equation dekh liji aap. Look at this equation, M is equal to T plus C. So, mind M is mind, T is thought, C is consciousness. If mind is equal to thoughts plus consciousness, then consciousness should be equal to mind minus thought. This is yog, chitta vritti nirodh means emptying your mind of thought, usse kya hoga consciousness will come to the forefront, consciousness will get generated. So, this is the purpose of yoga to become more aware than identified with the thought process. But many times this capacity is not exercised, there is no yog in life. This is the actual purpose of yog that you are freeing your mind from all sorts of modifications, so that your awareness comes to the forefront and you become deeply conscious when you become aware you have become conscious isn't it you start living in the present moment you build focus. So isiliye hum yog kar rahein so the first 4 sutras of Patanjali Yog Sutras will give you this the purpose of yog the very first 4 sutras see Patanjali Yogasutras will give you this the purpose of Yog the very first four sutras see Patanjali Yogasutra are aphorisms very small book but they are aphorisms sutra sutra car which means very very profound knowledge in very pithy, very small statements. That is the meaning of an aphorism. So it is like a time bomb, you know, tremendous knowledge in very small sentences. So now we have to extract the meaning through practice. You see the very first sutra of Patanjali Yoga Sutra will tell you Atha Yoga Anushasanam, that is the first point which I have written there. Now, we begin the study of yoga. The second sutra says Yogas tu chitta vritti nirodh, which means yoga means stopping the modifications of the mind, why should you do that? The third sutra will say Tadadrashta Swaroopey Avasthanam which means so as to extract the witness consciousness, the awareness which underlies the thought process to extract that you are putting down thought. And then if you maintain it like that the state of clarity of awareness it will resolve into its source. That is why you are trying to stop the thought process and if you do not do this what happens the fourth sutra will tell you. The fourth sutra says vritti saarupyam itaratra. If you do not do this, your awareness will remain mixed up with thought, you will remain identified with the thought process and being carried away, you are riding the waves of your thoughts, is not it? When you are angry, anger blows you away, when you are sad, ekdum depression, when you are happy, you are on the clouds so why is this happening? because you are completely identified with your thoughts your awareness is completely you know it's one with the thought so in this creating a little distance is the only. You must be able to separate your awareness from the thought process. So, you see your thought as an object. So, yog ka maqsad yahi hai. This is the aim of the practice of yoga that you are able to so handle your mind that awareness is you can extract it. So, when you have become more aware than identified with a thought process you have become deeply conscious from within is conscious experience code deepen karte karte karte karte you will reach super consciousness are you getting it that is why yog. Yog is not about merely those physical exercises, yoga is not merely about building physical health, it is about changing your level of awareness itself, it is about getting you the highest knowledge, so understand the purpose of yoga, jitna hum le sakte hai isme se hum lenge, jitna hum le sakte hai utna lenge, lekin the purpose of yoga is very great, it is to know your own self, to know that you are the pure consciousness in which there are thoughts, identification with which brings you body consciousness and world consciousness, you are separate from the mind you are separate from the thought process actually speaking but usually you are identified with it. How does identity come in our life? When you draw something to yourself and stick to it you are you identify with it it comes by choice it doesn't come by default please check and see Jo bhi identity hai aapki it is something you have drawn to yourself by yourself you are just self-aware ye cheez first person mein pakadni hai ye koi theory nahi hai by yourself you are only self-aware the rest is imposed through the thought process so easily a yog the purpose is not the world well why should I put down mind then you go to sleep that is not the purpose of yog the purpose of yog is to awaken this higher awareness so So, in full vitality if you practice yoga as it should be practiced, thought will get subdued, awareness will come to the forefront. You deepen it, you will become more and more conscious from within and you can handle thought. If the torch is fixed somewhere, then you can see only what is under it. But if you have a torch in your hand, you can see the nook and corner of this room, as you wish. So, awareness is like that. If the mind is in your hands, torch hai, aapka mann, you can see everything with that all knowledge will come to you if it is in your hand if it is not in your hand wherever it is fixed only little bit of knowledge will come to you. Aisa hai, isi liye hum yog study kar rahe hain, isi liye this is a science of consciousness, your own consciousness. It is the giving you the knowledge about you, it is there is nothing more interesting than this let me tell you, you will find this to be the most interesting if you catch it properly, because it is about you, who will not be interested tell me, so you see the very purpose of yog has been given in the first 4 sutras itself. This is the tremendous possibility in the human life that you can uncover your own real nature which is pure existence, pure consciousness just by this process . So, that is the reason why Ashtang Yog may itna kuch wo maangte hai hai na preconditions for you just stick to the preconditions and practice Samyama you it will unravel to you great knowledge this is the promise Jo karte hai unko milta hai, jo sirf iske baare mein sochte hai that's just the first step you know Vedanta mein kehte hai teen steps hote hai shravan manan aur nididhyasana shravan hai sunna it's only the first step the transformation has to happen in your consciousness isle manan bhi chahiye aur nididhyasana, meditation bhi chahiye. Then only you get this knowledge. Hai na? It is knowing by being, not knowing as an object. Ye samajh mein aara hai? See, when we go into samyama, you will catch this even more profoundly. See this is the process of Samyama. Samyama I told you it means dharana, dhyana and samadhi done simultaneously one after the other on a single object that is called Samyama. Anything you do Samyama upon will reveal its knowledge to you. Yog mein bahut kuch Samyama ke will reveal its knowledge to you . If you do it on this, you will get this particular result. You do it on your breathing, you will get this result. You do it on your mental faculties, you will get this particular result . Yes, so we will study it like that it it satisfies all purposes I can tell you that the art of concentration is the secret of success in life anywhere so you see now how they are building focus and concentration in Samyama once you have understood Pratyahara the step before this you will understand Dharana. Pratyahara kya hai? I told you Pratyahara means it is the withdrawal of senses and mind from all other things and putting it on one object only it is conscious withdrawal. Iska matlab means when you sit for meditation, suppose you are meditating on Om, you are thinking about Om, but when the mind goes out, after a few seconds it has gone somewhere, you bring it back. Again focus on Om, again it will go somewhere, again you will bring it back, again then it went tangentially somewhere again you bring it back. So, conscious ah mind . This is still the process of . You are shutting your senses to everything else, you are shutting your mind to everything else, only the object of concentration is before you. But the next step is dharana, jo wahan diya gaya hai. See during this dharana also it is a development over pratyahara, iska matlab hai now it has stopped going to various objects, your mind. It is now focused only on the object of your concentration OM. Just for example, we have taken OM, but there are still many tracks of thoughts. Dekhiye woh jo arrows hai, there are 5 tracks going on in your mind. Yeh hota rehta hai na? Many things, thinking many things at a time. At your age always this is happening. So, many tracks going on in the mind. Usually these tracks will be about different things, but at least when you come to Pratyahara and Dharana, it is about the same thing. Five tracks are going on, but see, Panch level ka thinking chal raha hai. That also is intermittent, not continuous. Please see the arrows there, they explain everything. So, dharana state means you have brought yourself to a level of focus on the object, one object, but still many tracks. Pratyahara means many objects, many tracks. Dharana means one object, many tracks, okay. But still dharana is a quite a powerful state, jiske baare mein aapko ek baar dharana ho jaye, you will catch that object, the knowledge about that object completely. Usually concentrated people have this state, dharana is not uncommon, especially for people like you that is why you have achieved an admission here . So, Dharana state is powerful in itself you can gain vast knowledge in a small amount of time through the power of Dharana, but it is not the ultimate thing . Noke baad hai dhyan, dhyan ka matlab hai no more tracks, see there I the subject the whole mind is moving towards the object of concentration, only one track, full mind is going there, like if you pour oil from one vessel to another, one track , I meditating on the object, one track, completely mind is going to the object, no five tracks, no two tracks even. And continuous flow of oil, nothing is intermittent, this is a very powerful state. If you practice meditation, you will understand its power, because your vitality will come into full operation, full bloom in this state and still there is a distinction between the subject your your act of meditation and the object is called tripartite distinction both a between knower knowledge and known. This distinction remains in dhyan but your vrittis have become such that there is continuous flow towards the object and no disruption. Now, if this state of dhyan is maintained for 144 seconds, not a small time, 2 minutes and 24 seconds, it will become samadhi is come up to a minute 24 second other than the object so Samadhi is complete absorption in the object you will actually enter the consciousness of the object is always an elevated object is chosen a deity a divine symbol ya aisa kuch jo aapke mann ko lift karega hai na because you will actually enter the consciousness of the object you will become one with it so the symbol will reveal its meaning Artha Matra Nirbhasa is called in Yog Sutra which means the import of that symbol you merge into that that alone occupies your mental field there is no eye meditating on that only that is there shining in your awareness you have merged into it yes a modesty to it. Dhyan hai pratyaya ek pratyaya ko maintain karna with the tripartite distinction but samadhi is artha matra nirbhasa only one thing shining in your consciousness you have merged into it . So, when you merge into the consciousness of something and become one with it, your own consciousness has come to full bloom. Please understand this it is knowing by being, it is not knowing as an object, you know the Tatparya of Om, you know the actual import of the symbol in that state, because you have become that your own consciousness came to full fruition. This state can only be understood if you get proficiency in Dhyan in meditation, until then it is only an imagination what you think of samadhi, because it is an all absorptive state and it will transform you completely. So, this is the highest level of existence actually, you should understand this whenever we talk of human life or human existence you do not know what you are talking about. Usually you are talking about the sense life, o itna intermittent and fractured hai your look at your thought process in that sense life, it is so broken and intermittent that it can hardly be called life. At least the state of meditation you will understand that what I am capable of. Awareness has come into bloom. That can be called life. But Samadhi is actually entering into real life because you are you have become fully aware you understand your own real nature as Brahman. So, ye cheeze ordinary cheeze nahi hai isko hasil karne ke liye you should have that dum which means you must invest time and energy into it and then you will get a taste of real life and existence till then it is only managing your problems and the silliness of the mind nothing else you actually can't call it life that's why so many people go into depression demoralized mind happens why this happens is if you don't touch your source that is bound to happen. Sabka parichay hai, apna hi parichay nahi hai. This is the problem. When you don't touch your source, all these states of mind are present. The mind is actually revolting against the superficiality of life. Isiliye depression. So, get out of this see this is the age when you should make yourself such a way you will be able to at least taste something of this taste real life I am telling you and then you do whatever you want you will be successful hai na for him success is not an option always he will be successful because the mind is so pointed. Toh this samadhi state it is a really transforming experience completely you know have you seen anybody in this state you have seen Sri Ram Krishna Paramahamsa's photo isn't it every picture there are three pictures of Sri Ramakrishna Voh Bahod Bade Saint The, realized soul we look upon him as incarnation of God himself because mann hamesha God consciousness me rehta tha always in Samadhi occasionally he would come out and have a little something and pass. In one day many times he would go into Samadhi. And in between he would come out and say something. He had to forcefully bring his mind down to eat something. So our problem is opposite you know we have to lift them by force and bring them down by force for the simple reason the mind has touched the consciousness of God and it lives in that God consciousness so once I can tell you this story it is very interesting there was a doctor there, Dr. Mahendralal Sarkar, to unko laga ye kya cheez hai, what does he experience in this state, I want to check. To wo stethoscope leke aaye and he brought his friends also. So all this group of doctors came there and then he the master Shri Ram Krishna he went into samadhi. Suddenly whenever there was any suggestion of God or something divine he would go into that state so he immediately removed the stethoscope and checked pulse pulse was not there, then he checked heartbeat, heartbeat was also not there then he thought what is this Shri Ram Krishna's eyes were just half open so he with his finger he touched his eyeball to see if there is any movement and he saw no movement, no response, no reaction, nothing nothing is there, where has the man gone? Then he just has sat there stunned after a while, after a long time, Shri Ram Krishna came back into that system and flooded with ecstasy and joy bliss and the knowledge of what he had touched or fear bow bow nail again what he had experienced and this doctor and his group of friends were all in shock KK says I'm aware science has no explanation to this this is the Yogi's state please understand though yes somehow a human life me and whatever came out of his mouth became gospel Shri Ram Krishna's mouth that those are the great you can say eternal truths of human existence and human life because he lives in this state god consciousness PCB cheese code deeply Johnny Kaleo God consciousness, to know anything deeply you have to merge in it. When you merge in something divine like this you will get the highest knowledge of human existence. So these are not ordinary states of mind. See the stillness now you are feeling in this room. Is this stillness kya sambhav hai aur kahi, I can see how serious all of you have become. It is only because of a foretaste of this state is there when you feel extremely happy, aap tab man ki avastha dekho, it is in a state of relative calm, very stable state where you are deeply aware, but not identified with any silly thought pattern. So, yeh state jo hai, this is your real nature actually. Lekin we have lost it completely. In today's modern lifestyle, it is a rare thing to even think of something like this, but you should remember you are you have inherited this spiritual heritage all of you . It has been put down they were experiences of those yogis and rishis they have put it down. So, it is a possibility in the human life to get the real taste of in depth life what you say pure awareness. So, you must understand that this is perfectly possible it is not a fantastic idea somebody's idea this is a this is a way of life for the yogi. I will I will explain the same thing from the first person standpoint, iska matlab hai through vritti and pratyaya ye kise lagta hai. Aap dekhiye next slide, stages to the meditative state, See the ordinary mind, our mind is like this usually, Vrittis are all different. Now you are thinking of car, next your mobile phone, then your books, then while outing. So, you are thinking of all sorts of things, you see Vritti, that blue line is Vritti, the content inside it is Pratyaya. So, mind is restless, always moving, modifying, busy. It is basically only restless, okay and uncontrolled. So, this is the ordinary mind hm you can relate it to your own life and see then the next stage is dharana. Now, we will try to understand the mind in dharana . According to the when the is some elevating object the the also will get modified. Occasionally some other thought may come, but that is ok you are still building focus ah. Dekhiye dharana state me from the first person perspective how it goes? Vrittis are fairly regulated pratyaya is fixed, occasional some other thought may come that is ok. But in the state of dhyan, you see the picture there the vrittis are only the same always falling at the same point. So, no movement of mind and the object the pratyay has become luminous, o slide mein theek tarah se nahi nikla, but it it shines in your awareness awareness because there is no unnecessary movement of mind no thought activity other than this and in Samadhi there is no vritti only the object shines only the pratyaya will shine completely when there is no vritti there is no mind vritti mind means vrittis when no vritti no mind so you have transcendent mind in samadhi you have gone far above the normal state of mind so extreme concentration me aisa hota hai you know Olympic shooters, the final shot they hit, at that time they become like a Swahili, they are so deeply into it and everything has become, it has got stunned into silence, the movement of the hand, the eye everything has got riveted when they take aim and just look at it. And finally, when they shoot they are not in the system as it were. Unless you develop this utter steadiness of body, mind, intelligence, you will not achieve these higher states stillness doesn't mean passivity stillness doesn't mean tamas stillness means the state where you have become so sattvic that when you arrest all this you are deeply aware that level of awareness you are able to generate that is the stillness I'm speaking of. So, these states actually show you the essence of human existence. Ordinary state of mind, how much happiness this state will get you? The dharana state at least some degree of concentration you have developed, but these higher states will put you you know face to face with the highest. You must understand the knowledge in this state is knowledge born of being not of knowing . You transcend that the subject object difference you will transcend that because you have merged into the consciousness of the object you can know it only by doing it Vivekananda when he was young he had this deep longing for Nirvikalpa Samadhi and for many days he pestered his guru, Sri Ram Krishna was his guru, so he said it will happen, it takes time but it will happen then one day suddenly he was in a particular garden house, Kashipur garden house, there suddenly he got the experience when he was meditating. He felt the as if a light had burst in his head and he he completely merged into it and that is the light of awareness, even to use language is difficult you know in for all this and he could not find his body after that, because sensation has completely withdrawn. So, where are my hands and where are where is my feet, he was saying after that experience. So, he had his consciousness had completely touched the reality of existence Brahman. Then later he says that you know in that state the dual mode does not exist that I am meditating on something No, I have become one with it, so then language will not work Now which language will you describe it in? This is just giving you a foretaste of your possibilities But whatever you practice you know that will build up in your life I say practice meditation for 5 minutes there is guided meditation on YouTube also 5 minute guided meditation I have given it here only, if you put it on YouTube you will get it every day try to calm your mind and see the effect for yourself. Now I will give you one particular paradigm for you to understand how your vital energies and these states are connected. When you finish your training here and go somewhere US, UK, wherever you go You have taken a course on Rajyog That must show that you have the knowledge You must not be like, I don't know anything about it That should not be the case That is why I am going to give you one paradigm which will explain how exactly all these things work. This is a paradigm drawn from the Vedas. It is also there in the Tantra. It is there in the minor Upanishads of the Vedas called Yoga Upanishads. It has its roots in the Vedas but it was developed in Tantra. This is called Shad Chakra It has its roots in the Vedas but it was developed in Tantra. Isko kehte hain Shud chakra model. There are various names given to this model but it is something very profound which you should understand. Ab iske baare mein hum jo discuss karne jaa rahe hain nadis and chakras that you will not find in the physical body. Why? chakras that you will not find in the physical body, why? Because it is present in the pran maikosh not in your annamaikosh, because it is to do with your pran with your vital energies. So, if you cut open the body you will not find all these chakras and nadis and all this. To iske matlab ye nahi hai ki wo nahi hai, what is a Nadi, what is a Chakra? Nadi is nothing but a conduit for your vital energy. A Chakra is nothing but the junction points where you can concentrate vital energy. Now when you do meditation, you will understand you can concentrate vitality at different points in your body. So we are giving it the derayen and vitality flows in your body so there must be conduits or channels usika naam nadi hai so you will not find it in the physical body but in the pranmayakosh it is found now these nadis are thousands in number through which your vital energy is moving but there are three main nadis Ida, Pingala and Sushumna. Most people are sensitive only to Ida and Pingala, when these are balanced which means vital energy is flowing normally, stably and in a in a proper way without whirlpools, your mental life will be very clear, calm, composed, ah the intellect will be shining, working well, no frustrations, no negative emotions, no shouting, screaming, no depression, nothing of all this. But if the vital vitality in your nadis is disturbed, usme agar whirlpools pulls ah jaye and this can happen through unlawful thinking, through bad emotions, through criminal attitudes, pran shakti ullat palat ho jati hai, then you will suffer from deep disturbances in the ida and pingala. It will lead to further you know all kinds of emotional ah upheavals, intellectual obsessions, physical obsessions, all sorts of ah an erratic lifestyle. It is only because the pranic energy in your system has not been controlled, it has not become stable. So, isile yogis work from the standpoint of vital energy. Jnanis will work from the standpoint of thought. You work anyway, no problem, but they correspond with each other. If you keep the vitality stable in your system, which means vitality is focused upward, your mental life will be clear, calm, your thoughts will be pure and noble, your emotions will be beautiful or agar pran shakti is a going anyway, anyhow, your mental life will be bizarre, aapko hi achha nahi lagega, all sorts of thoughts and low emotions, all you will suffer from depression all this. So, there is a correspondence between your vital energy and your mental life, please understand this and that is why regulating the flow of vital energy NIDA and Pingala becomes important. How will you regulate? So, easily regulated through thought does not matter. Think beautiful thoughts, listen to beautiful music and get into habits, do not get into silly addictions. It will ruin one decade of your life I am telling you. Abhi se agar drinks and drugs mein jao, it will ruin one decade at least of your life, do not go in to to that level at all. This is called regulation of lifestyle, make it as sattvic as possible. So, which means what your vital energy will start flowing harmoniously in your system naturally. mental energy will start flowing harmoniously in your system naturally so your mental life will be luminous beautiful attention attention will not be a problem paying attention but unlawful thoughts all kinds of things if you keep ingesting that just say you know you went to a dustbin and took and ate something from there as I would attack mine can also become a dustbin it can become a gold mine or it can become a dustbin depending on your exposures your thoughts to easily in sub cheese okoda take a kakana a apnea because it's your life it's your awareness so take care of yourself first. Once you regulate the Ida and Pingala, you will have a balanced mental life. Then for the yogi, he becomes sensitive to the Sushumna channel, which means he gets the capacity to raise vital energy along a central channel called Sushumna. Yes, a big capacity but people who are deeply spiritual they are able to raise vital energy through the central Nadi Sushumna and through these chakras they can raise it upward. So, jab tak ye energy in teen it is in these lower chakras you see je jo yaha depicted hai muladhar, swadishthan and manipura. These chakras are the lower chakras we say. So, as long as the energy is there the mind is there you will be interested only in eating, drinking, sleep, sex that's all once the energy reaches Anahata at once spiritual awakening comes you are interested in deeper aspects of life the power of meditation comes naturally because you have raised vital energy to a particular level It is called heart center, Anahata and for the first time you taste the joy of pure awareness you taste beautiful emotions in your mind then after that is Vishuddha Chakra when the energy is raised there or you can say when the mind reaches that chakra then what happens you can only talk of these things you can only think about them so higher awareness higher joy Sri Ram Krishna is to say the mind will only want to talk of God when it it goes further up, Agnya Chakra me jab, the mind dwells, then one understands that there is only a little difference between me and the Supreme. It is like seeing through a lantern, Sri Ramakrishna used to say. The light is inside, I am outside, there is only just a bit of glass separating us, but cheez ek hi hai. is only just a bit of glass separating us but cheese a key and finally when it merges into the Sahastrar you merge into Samadhi the knowledge of Brahman the knowledge of the absolute so they k any paradigm you follow some something what happens to your energy is this what what is happening, it is getting raised higher and higher, correspondingly higher awareness is opening up for you. Isiliye mene wo graph diya hai waha par. Ab dekhiye ek graph hai waha niche. That graph means as you systematically raise vital energy, your awareness will unfold as you systematically raise vital energy your awareness will unfold. So, you see this is what is figuratively in many ways it is described Shiv Shakti Kamilan kehte hai many things because you know vital energy is Shakti and consciousness is Shiva. So, this is how the energy reaches its destination. Figuratively, if you go to the net, all sorts of ideas you will find, but the point is this, you can raise vital energy to its goal, to its destination. And you can, your mind can itself turn divine, plunge into God consciousness through this method. So this is a paradigm to understand the states of your mind. How to attain meditation? How to get into the meditative state? You must get the capacity to handle your vital energy. But you don't have to do all these things on your own. Yes, I have seen the slide, I will do it today. It is not like that. You need the guidance of a Guru. Just now we are giving you a knowledge of this, that's all. This knowledge is nothing, I am telling you. The real thing is practice, sticking to a particular Kriya, then you will find the transformation within yourself. So, that only from the guru you have to get it, because it is please remember a transformation of energy, isn't it. What is the law of conservation of energy? Energy can neither be created nor destroyed, but it can be transformed from one form to another same with your vital energy it is also energy. You cannot destroy it you cannot create it God created it for you, you can transform it into the highest powers, you can transform it into this supreme attention you require for whatever success in life, you can transform it into God consciousness or you can waste it on drinks and drugs also. How you will handle your the vitality in your system because you know that will define you, it will define your life. So, easily I have given you this particular paradigm think over it it is very scientific it is not hodgepodge you have the capacity to concentrate vitality in your system raise it understanding what its destination is that is the way to elevate, that is the way to get more out of life. If you do not understand this process, you will allow it to stagnate somewhere. If it stagnates, your mental life will turn awkward, very bizarre addictions, obsessions, negative thinking. See today this is the problem with our young people, basic cheez mein training nahi hai, how to handle your system and your thought and your emotion, you should learn that first is not it. How to handle nuclear energy, how to handle solar energy that you should learn next, but how to handle my own energy I should learn first, is not it? So, you must learn it at least now. If you want to remain out of depression throughout your life, if you want to remain out of negativity throughout your life, learn to raise your energies negativity throughout your life learn to raise your energies to your heart learn to think nobly always learn to be service minded I said through thought automatically you raise vital energy If you get good feelings in your mind, kindness, service, love, feeling for others. Do it to your parents who have made you what you are. That itself is a big thing. You see how your character will transform. This education is part and parcel of the education you are receiving. Yeh koi special course nahi hai. This is actually your life. If you train yourself like this right from now, you know you will be a leader anywhere. Nahi toh you will only be the boss. Kaunsa banna hai? Boss banna hai ya leader? Leader banna hai na? So, leaders are like this. They see something more than what the ordinary can see and they have worked on transforming themselves into that. Sirf cheeze jannna, your Google search engines are there to do that for you. Whatever information you require, you will get it today with just one click, you will get it. But, real knowledge and knowledge which leads to wisdom will come only when you work on yourself how to live well how to think properly the rest will follow when you think nobly and when you think great things, naturally your vital energy is getting lifted to the heart. Aur kuch karne ki zarurat hi nahi hai pata hai. Because I told you thought is the highest expression of pran, vital energy. So, use your thought mechanism, you have so much of intelligence, you can do anything with it. In fact, our society depends on your intelligence for what it will become tomorrow. Isiliye become very responsible people. See, this one thing you must learn out of this course. Aap ye karo ya na karo, you must learn to be absolutely responsible, absolutely committed, conscientious individuals whom everybody can rely on then it is of various types I am going to give you some knowledge of that also because after taking a course on Rajyog you should not say is a theoretical knowledge See meditation is subject focusing on an object ok. Now when the meditation is about knowing the subject the nature of the subject it is called subjective meditation. When it is about knowing the nature of the object it is called objective meditation hm and when it is just to stabilize the process the mind it is called process meditation. So, like this there are types of meditations these are the three main main types hm and based on this I will be showing you a slide you must know something about the spiritual heritage of this country. How many types of meditations have been discovered, invented, you know, from right from the Vedic age. Vedic age kapp tha? Sir, if I continue, 1500 BC. More further by that is according to your Google, it was actually more than 4000 years back. In fact, if you go by archaeological findings, it is more than 8000 years back. So, Indian scholars, western scholars are divided on these opinions, but I am telling you the Vedic ages, most ancient age or Vahapar aap sochiye when the Americas were not even discovered, Europe was under the grip of Vikings and all that. Far beyond before that all this was going on in these Himalayan forest jaha par aaj aap bethe ho. This was going on in the Himalayan forest, these discoveries, these meditations, understanding the the nature of existence and life, experiments and all this was going on, usiko hum Vedic age kehte hain. From the product of that was the Upanishads, agar aap ek Upanishad padhoge, you will understand what tremendous research on consciousness was going on. So, that is what created our knowledge societies of that time Badmi invasion sab badme hua, lekin initially you see this is your history so this knowledge you will know it best in a sense because it is it is part of this culture, lekin don't say anything about it you never thought about it you are losing a huge chunk of precious knowledge I am telling you you must get knowledge of all the external but most important is to get knowledge of this system and this mechanism how it works how my thought works, how my emotion works, how I can handle my vital energies and what as a result what can I get. Because the individual is interacting with the collective with the world remember this is not it, then you will take the right things from the external also. Whatever impinges on your senses you will choose and take the right things and your life will be very good. To develop self development, that is the aim of yog. Development along all other fields is for the other sciences, but self development is the special fort of yoga and Vedanta. So, iske liye bahot saare techniques ab hum techniques practice karenge next class se because it is a practical next two sessions of ah on twelfth and then later whenever. So, those are will be sessions when you will actually practice the Pratyahar technique, Adharana technique and Dhyan of course Samadhi tak hum nahi jayenge no problem don't worry but at least this much you will practice and meditation I told you 5 minute meditation jo YouTube par hai IIT ka hi hai wo yahi pe diya gaya tha you can keep using that technique but I will make you practice it here also a bigger version of that. So, with this theoretical knowledge let me move to the next slide. Before I move to the next slide let me tell you a story based on this. See, when you talk of gathering knowledge, that knowledge which is purely of the nature of information will come to you automatically through your search engines whenever you want but what what we call knowledge in the yogic context is that which you know which is atindriya, jo aapka search engine aapke liye nahi laa sakta hai jiske baare mein you have to sensitize yourself to perceive it and knowledge of your own being self-awareness no one can tell you or give you can anybody introduce you to your own awareness tell me you have to know it by yourself you if you are keen you would invent techniques towards it who am I truly if you ask you will see that you are only awareness and in which a thought process starts and identifies with everything else, but awareness is fundamental to your experience. Iske baare mein research koi Vedanta kehte hain. It is that is why it is existential inquiry, inquiry about the nature of your existence. So do not think it is some great philosophy, it is inquiring into the nature of your existence. What is the bare nature of my existence? Or usko kaise reach kare this level of knowledge through yoga. Yoga mein jab aap stabilize ho jate ho, you will build attention to that extent that you can take up that inquiry. So, yoga is a step towards the knowledge of Vedanta. Once the mind becomes stable, you can get all subjective and objective knowledge just like that. But if the mind itself is unstable can you do anything so that is why we this is how we use yoga Swami Vivekananda kehte the ki yoga is the means to everything any form of yoga you take up it can be karma yoga it can be this Raj Bhakti Yoga, but it is the means to higher knowledge. So this is the value of this system of philosophy, it is a psychological philosophy because it is studying your own mind, kisi ka mind nahi study kar rahe hain, Patanjali is not studying his own mind or somebody's mind, it is always in the first person, it is studying your mind okay and when you study the mind of a healthy person, ek yogika mind agar study karo, you will know the reaches of the human intelligence, of the reaches of human consciousness, if you study only the sick mind, you know modern psychology this is the problem. You study only patients, then you will feel are a human mind is like this only. So, that is why the field of positive psychology and this contemplative psychology this has come up. The healthy mind you should study, the mind full of awareness, the mind full of intuition, the mind that is focused that is the healthy mind, the mind with beautiful emotions, elevating thoughts and the sick mind, depressed mind, stupid mind, wrongly conditioned mind that is the patient mind. How can you conclude human mind is the psychology is the study of the patient mind. So, be careful this will generate for you healthy mind you know if Freud and Jung and these people had studied a yogi, their psychology would have been different, but they went and studied some obsessed person, somebody obsessed with women, somebody obsessed with this or that and they concluded human psychology is like this what to do . So, understand healthy mind if you have this in your culture and heritage and you do not utilize it is not it a very tragic thing hm you see you must bring this into your life in whatever measure you can. Theoretical knowledge you are receiving bring the 5 minutes of practice into your life and you will see it will help you enormously regulating thought, emotion, energy and keeping attention very steady always. These are the immediate change which yoga will bring into your life.
 Thank you. See, before you go further in this knowledge, I just want to give you a story to illustrate few points. You must understand the power of your attention and the power of mindfulness then only I can go into the techniques of meditation because job meditation karoge you will understand its relevance to your life see the story is like this it is the story of a Japanese samurai and a young monk, a Japanese Buddhist monk. So samurai in feudal Japan, there used to be those warrior, some of them were monks also, monk warriors sort of, who were very well trained in martial arts. So now this samurai was, he was not a monk, he was just trained in, well trained in martial arts. So now this samurai was he was not a monk, he was just trained in well trained in the martial arts and he could fight very well. So he is also a young man and then there is a young monk who not very well trained in the martial arts, but very very concentrated, very beautiful personality. So once this samurai came and challenged the people of a village that anybody can fight with me, if you can fight with me I will know that you people have some substance, I do not think anybody in this village can fight with me. So the Zen master there sent this young monk, you go and answer him. So the young monk went and said yes, we can fight with you, but we prefer not to because we are nonviolent people. Then he said no no, you show me if you can fight, show me that you can fight. So, then this young monks also stood and the samurai also stood. Now, please see the this that samurai is a much older person and he is a he is a fighter he knows his job very well and he knows he is an expert in martial arts and this is just a young monk some 18 20 years old who has mastered the art of attention . So, both of them now the first fight is about sword sword fighting hm. Now this monk does not have experience that person has so much of experience. So, a all the crowd the whole village had gathered and all the crowd was actually cheering the young monk, but he did not have experience. So, many of them ah subconsciously they thought that he will lose where is he compared to the samurai but you know this monk had learnt his lessons very well although he did not have expertise with sword fighting he had learnt what his guru had told him very well and his guru had told him see my son if you want to know what is in the other person's mind or even what action he is going to perform you must first empty your mind you know there is something called being mindful and being mindful just now our mind is full full to If you empty this a little Mind full means Mindful ka matlab hai only thoughts are going on uncontrolled, koi awareness nahi hai waha par. So, this is default state for most youngsters, mind is full. But if you become mindful, then what will happen? Whatever is happening in other minds will reflect in your mind. So, you will know what your opponent wants to do automatically. The young monk remembered standing there, his teacher had told him, look my son, if you only focus on the sword, you will get carried away by the sword. If you only focus on the opponent, his eyes and his anger and his fury will carry away your mind. You will get the same emotions within you. If you focus on his feet, his the swiftness of his feet will carry away your mind. But if you empty your mind, you will not be carried away by anything. And what the other person is thinking or wants to do will reflect in your mind and you will know what to do. Are you guys catching this point? If you empty your mind, your mind will reflect what what is in front of you perfectly, because it has become mindful mindful not mindful and it will reflect what is going on perfectly and you will know what to do. So, he had learnt this lesson well. So, he was full of mindfulness that other fellow was full of ego, mindful. So, both clashed and in a matter of 5 minutes the young monk defeated him not because he was an expert at martial arts because he was mindful. This is the power of attention if you have an uncluttered mind do you know how much you can achieve if you have a cluttered mind how little you can achieve if you know that that at least that much you know how an uncluttered mind how much you can achieve. You must learn to empty mind periodically, this is what meditation techniques are about. Aap aap jaisa refresh button press karte ho na in your apps like that something like that mann mann bhi ek app hai mind is a app. You must refresh it from time to time and the cleaner you must run the cleaner otherwise all sorts of files will get accumulated viruses will get accumulated and then it won't function so for that there are meditation techniques that's the refresh button. So, you will renew your energies, you will renew your attention when you refresh. Isilie meditation technique says you see this monk one not because of his expertise, but because of his awareness, intelligence means being mindful. So, you must learn the art of mindfulness, there are various techniques to it, apne vipasana suna hai na, it is generating mindfulness through concentration of on breath. Like this there are various ways of generating mindfulness. I am now going to give you a list of techniques. Aap dekho kitna kuch treasure hai in our spiritual heritage by which you can remain in charge of yourself. You do not have to be carried away by this and that. So, let me show you the techniques such an you know only small bit I have put here. Aur bhi bahut kuch hai. See these are the techniques of meditation available to you. In the Vedic period, the main techniques I have put them here. You see Nididhyasana. Nididhyasana ka matlab hai the Vedic meditation technique. Shravan, manan, nididhyasana, Nididhyasana means the Vedic meditation technique Shravan, Manan, Nididhyasana, Nididhyasana what you hear that you must think again and again and you must meditate on it, that meditation is called Nididhyasana and there were various types of meditation given, see today you are hearing about this all this up a piece of yama Suna if you think about it repeatedly when you go to your room it will be Manan but if you sit quietly for five minutes and try to bring this knowledge into your mind it is nididhyasana. So, this will help you digest the information that you are constantly taking in. Otherwise, I told you know over cluttered mind, it will do anything just like that it will become impulsive. So, Nididhyasana is a practice to do this, first you get acquainted with the practices then second is neti neti, see this was actually meant for self-knowledge, iska matlab hai mann se aap jo nahi ho usko nikal dena, are you the cloth you are wearing? No. Are you the object in your pocket, your mobile and? No. It is your object, but you are not the object, isn't it? And are you your spectacles? Are you? No. You are your t-shirt? No. Then like that only, your body? You are wearing the body. Why you know it is an object of your perception if you are the body how it could be object to you thinking of my logic is correct or wrong if something is object of your perception it is object so which means you are different from it you can also objectify your thought man may have kya ho raha hai you can find out which means you are separate even from the mind hai ki nahi am i right which means body and mind also are objects to you objects of your experience. Aap identify kar lete ho wo alag baat hai, but the fact of your experience is they are perfect objects to your perceptions. Body you can, you objectify and study, medical science wahi hai na, mind you objectify and study, psychological sciences are that only. So then who are you? If you are not body and mind, if they are objects of your perception, toh aap koun hoon, neti neti yahi process hai, I am not this, I am not this, I am not this, when you keep doing this you come to iti, then I am that means I am apart from that, I am something else, finally it will boil down to pure awareness, I am only self aware, that is the fundamental experience of life, After that comes my thinking, my emoting, my willing, my attaching All this comes after that Fundamental experience of every human being is I am aware We have to hold this awareness So neti neti is the process to do that I am not the body, I am not the mind, I am not the objects I am not my perceptions, I am not my memories, I am not my emotions, however nice it may be, I am not that, I am not my anger, I am not my resentment, I am not my love, I am not my joy, then who am I? You will finally come to I the awareness and experiencing all this in my mental firmament it is an object of my experience object is not subject isn't it are you getting my point see these are all classic Vedantic techniques for you to understand your own real nature Aisai thought process se aap samajh sakte ho what is my real nature then you know when thought is very bad gloomy negative thinking kar rahe ho and then it will automatically deplete your energy so you feel very bad that time you should practice the sensei, am I that thought? Thought is mine, but I am not the thought. They say T-shirt is you, your T-shirt you are wearing is yours, but you are not the T-shirt. Like that your thoughts are yours, but you are not the thought. You are thinking those thoughts because you have conditioned yourself like that though Hoda who say distance Karka deco up now it is a perfect object of your perception your cognition so then you will understand only awareness I am not of what yehi toh baat hai not awareness of something pure awareness just being you are pure awareness which does not have to be aware of something in yourself self-awareness is what defines you. But in that when a thought process comes in you feel you must become aware of something to be there. It is a huge theory, Descartes postulation that I I am only when I think, is this true? Suppose you are not thinking, tab aap ho ya nahi ho? When you are not thinking, ab dekho kal hum meditation practice karenge, I will put you into the state of shoonya, empty mind. That time you must only tell me whether you are still there or you are not there at all. What I am telling you is whether thought is there or not, whether emotion is there or not, you are there. You are right there mister, do not worry. Your awareness is always there there thought can come and go that's why these practices are there Neti neti is disidentifying with what you are not so that you remain as what you always are you are pure being this is Vedanta pure consciousness that is called Atma Vastu, you are that self It is very difficult to say in Hindi Because if I use the word Atma, you will think of a physical Atma You will think of a ghost, that is not the case, that is a different thing Atma means in core truth about your existence Your own consciousness, pure consciousness That is called the Atman Atma vastu hai wo So you are that functioning through a body-mind complex With a little thinking you can understand this You are not your thought Due to your conditioned mental mechanism it is going on and on and on and on check this out and see okay yes our experiments thought experiments He has become very concentrated and very, very alert. Yes, distance yourself and see for yourself, do you remain over when you are distanced from the thought process? Find out and tell me. I have actually done that. Yes, then what did you find? I saw it on Google, it is a mental illness. It is a mental? Yes, some people dissociate from all their experiences. No, no, see if you do it yogically, you do it as it is done in meditation, you will find that whether there is a thought or no thought in your mind you as awareness are always there any one of you do you ask the question I am here or not, I don't know, do you ever ask this? we are always here, why? you are awareness in your awareness through a thought process you identify with body, mind, objects, senses, everything, but self-awareness is fundamental. Find out for yourself if this is true or not. Yeh koi aapko convince nahin kar sakta, aapke upar impose nahin kar sakta because it is your own experience which escapes your confused mind. Find out for yourself you are very capable of it, but you must do it with a little yoga practice I am telling you because mind should be stable to conduct an inquiry like this. If mind is morose, depressed or very unstable you will not get the right answer. Are you getting it? So, this is one another next method neti neti which means not this not this I am not this not this so then you will remain over as what you truly are a method. Then there are vidyas, vidyas are Vedic meditations which are very beautiful actually. There are a number of vidyas like Madhu Vidya, Akshar Vidya, Shandilya Vidya. Each is a meditation of the realization of some Rishi. Ek Rishi ne jo experience paya uske through his meditation. If you meditate on that experience, you will get the same experience. Like for example, in Madhu Vidya, the Rishi has experienced everything is pouring, dripping with bliss. Madhu Vidya yehi kehati hai ki the sky is bliss, the ocean is bliss, the waters are bliss, the vegetation is bliss, these animals around me are bliss, these trees are dripping bliss, each grass is dripping with bliss because he has awakened to the supremely blissful state again if we want the same experience you just have to meditate on this Madhu Vidya and something of that you will catch. A doosre universities may be isper practicals we have put that you meditate on this and you will get something of that. See how beautiful must be that state of mind where you are feeling everything is dripping bliss. Yahi cheez hai. Vidyas are like this, very powerful techniques, today we have lost a large part of this literature only because this did not come to you, if one or two generations go out of touch with this, you will lose that bit of knowledge, so now you have to reverse the gear and come back and understand this this very profound knowledge about your own being. So you have to do this at least understand what they are how profound it is what they are trying to say then you see there is mantra meditations in the Vedic age. Whatever you find in the Vedas are themselves called mantras. What is a mantra? Rhythm. Yes, actually mantra means mananatrayate iti mantra, which means jisko baar baar sochne se ya repeat karne se jo liberate karta hai man ko that is a mantra it is an insight which a rishi gets which becomes a mantra agar aap ek cheez ko first person mein pakad lo means by yourself you catch something in first person means by yourself you realize something it will become like a mantra to you that this is the law of existence here Physics has so many laws, they are insights into the nature of physical existence these are insights into the nature of human existence about life about consciousness this is that's why this is science, science of consciousness so mantras are powerful you can get the experience of the Rishi this is this meditation so Gayatri mantra many of you are karte ho na, many of you are saying yes, so you see why we do Gayatri mantra, Upanayan ceremony jab hota hai tab Gayatri mantra diya jata hai, why do we do it, because the experience of the Rishi who gave out that mantra should become our experience, that experience is one of awakening of Dhi, awaken my higher intelligence that I may know your nature you who illumine the three worlds this is the prayer of Gayatri Om Bhur Bhuvah Swah Tat Savitur Varenyam Bhargo Devasya Dhi Mahi Dhiyo Yona Prachodayat, Dhyo yona give me that intelligence by which I can know your supreme being which illumines this universe Gayatri mantra ke upar talk hai aap dekh sakte ho youtube mein it was also given here we did a practical on Gayatri here you know ek course mein paanch courses diya hai mene abhi, in one course we did Gayatri here each and every student did it, they were so interested because Gayatri is a mantra for higher intelligence so that your intelligence does not remain stupid it's your actual prayer, which given to you in Mantra form that's why it is given in Upanayan ceremony so that your intelligence starts sparkling after that 8-10 years it is given so this is regarding mantras, mantras are very powerful, Mantra is very common now a days, everyone is called as Mantra, don't take it like that, when it is being used in this sense, it is something very valuable, it is an insight into the nature of existence, so it is valuable to human life, you must pay it that respect. So this is regarding mantra meditations in the Vedas, then there are inquiry based meditations I told you know Vedanta means existential inquiry trying to logically discern the nature of human existence this is Vedanta existential inquiry it is not some abracadabra it is very scientific many both are a Up is one of the most logical processes to superfine higher experiences. It is scientific, see they do not ask you to believe something, they do not ask you to be like this or like that. It is not a kind of dogma or a doctrine, it is not a belief system, it is not a faith, it is a way of life because it is existential enquiry trying to understand the nature of your own existence. This is Vedant and all the meditations that is why are enquiry based not faith based don't worry so you see Koham it is enquiring who am I don't you want to know who you are? Everyone of us wants to know Who am I? This is called Koham in meditation Raman Marshi used to do this. You have heard of him right? If you have not read Raman Marshi, you don't know what you are missing That is why I say keep some of this literature in your room Vivekananda's small books are available please keep them in your room the small life of Shri Ram Krishna for deep inspiration you can keep Raman Maharshi's talks, small books, self-realization is a book an introduction to his life keep these books in your room you will see the impact on your mind Self-realization is a book and an introduction to his life. Keep these books in your room. You will see the impact on your mind. You will live a life at a deeper level. So his main method was this, Koham, who am I? And you know the conclusion he came to as a result of this inquiry my existence is evident with or without thought my existence is evident with or without body so I am the self beyond body and mind functioning through a body and mind he came to this realization through Koham so that is why I am telling you these are all very very profound techniques to help you live at the deepest level of existence to really enjoy life otherwise you are missing life I am telling you getting caught up in a 100 meaningless obsessions. The mind stop in a if you do not remain in touch with these things. So this is Koham then Mahavakya which are it will require 2 more classes. So I will not go into this. It is a very profound something see Mahav vakyas are actually very pithy statements you will find in Upanishads which directly tell you the equation between you and Brahman you and God like aham brahmasmi, tattvam asi, prajnanam brahma, ayamatma brahma these are the four maha vakyas in four different Upanish. If you just meditate on this and analyze them there is a way to do that. Yaah par nahi kar sakte because it takes time. You will get a thorough understanding of your consciousness and how it is related to the supreme consciousness. This is Mahavakya vichar. Then you have Panchakosha vichar which is analysis of the different bodies you wear. Aap soch raha ho ye sirf, this is the only body I am wearing. This is what is called body, isn't it? This flesh and blood, this is called body. But you know in Vedanta, even the Pranamayakosh is a body you are wearing the vital energy sheath where does your pran flow agar is sharir ko slice karo will you find pran you would not find. If I slice those wires do you think I will find electricity you would not find why it is it exists at a subtle level you cannot see it. Can you see electricity anybody? Anybody has seen? Lightning you have seen, you have not seen electricity. You see the manifestations of electricity. So also you see the manifestations of prana, you do not see prana. So, isile uska sheeth jo hai where it exists it is called prana mayi kosh. Then there is manoomayikosh, where does your mind exist? Here in physical space? No. So, where your mind is functioning, the plane of thought, that is called Manomayikosh. So, you are wearing so many bodies you see, not just physical body. Then there is Vijnanamayikosh, which means where your intelligence functions, your awareness and will come into operation, that is the Vijnanamayikosh which means where your intelligence functions your awareness and will come into operation that is the Vijnanamayikosh. Anandamayikosh the bliss or causal sheath. Uske baad hai atma, atma vastu the self. So this is called panchakosh vichara in Vedanta. Iska matlab hai just analyzing analyzing all that you are wearing you will finally come to who you are without all this that you are wearing, are you the cloth you are wearing? No, you are wearing your cloth, also you are wearing these bodies. What to do? You have identified with the cloth you are wearing. Many fools are doing this, is not it? My style defines me, my cloth defines me. So, you are allowing matter to define you. What to do? So, the point is this through all this vichar you see techniques of inquiry you can go into the real nature of your existence. These are the Vedic meditations, a Buddhist meditation there are many more. So, many types of vichar are there, maybe at the end of this course I will give you sample of Vedantic enquiry, how profound and powerful it is. So, many types are there, you can take up anyone and practice it, but here we will this just sample what I am giving you, then the Buddhist types of meditations are there, where was Buddhism born? Indian, it is also a part of the Indian tradition, is not it? Where was Buddhism born? Indian it is also a part of the Indian tradition, is not it? Buddha was a Hindu, badme he went against the Vedic dharma. So, it was called Buddhist, it became Buddhist, but he was born a Hindu. So, it these are all systems of for religion, they are religions basically, but they give you systems of meditations and inquiry which will lead you to self knowledge. So Buddhist meditations may be mindfulness, mindfulness I have already told you, is not it? It is not being mindful, but being just mindful, uncluttered mind where you are fully aware is mindfulness, you are at the present moment hm. So, this is a very Vipassana all fall under this category hm, then there is Metta which is meditation on loving kindness hm. You know Buddhist monks they practice this so much and so beautifully ah once there was an experiment conducted I think it was in New York University only. Jahan par they ah they put electrodes on many Tibetan monks and try to find out their state of what ah waves they radiate EEG tracking, what waves they radiate in the state of meditation. So, electrodes and then they were asked to go into meditation. So, one monk went into a state of deep meditation with the thought of loving kindness, ye vo practice karte hain, just thinking of mercy, compassion, loving kindness and you know his entire prefrontal cortex ignited. He is radiating very high waves, alpha waves and theta waves because just the thought of loving kindness has ignited his own whole brain as it were and blissful the entire d manner became full of bliss a different energy is radiating as it were. So you see the practice of meditation will make you like that, just one thought and spark. This is these meditations, so powerful. Yeah actually experiment who are Dalai Lama only had sent these monks. So they understood, you know the people who are measuring the scientist they concluded he must be the happiest guy on the planet. Kyuki ek thought se jiska man itna praful ho jata hai, he must be very lucky guy they said. So, the third is vipassana. Vipassana are also techniques for you know focus on breathing to develop self-awareness. Then contemplations of various kinds are there, see I cannot go into that we do not have time hmm. Then reflections on this Pratitya Samudpada, it is actually a philosophical concept which means dependent origination, we do not have time for that, this will also take one class if I go into that hmm. Then there are post Vedic meditations like Shabda Aparoksha. See meditation on Mahavakya will bring you insight into what it is stating. Aparoksha Anubhuti it will bring you. That is called Shabda Aparoksha. When the mind is ripe enough just the hearing of Mahavakya from the words of the Guru, from the mouth of the Guru will lead to this state. This is called Shabda Aparoksha. It is a very elevated state. You can say the culmination of a lot of practice, Shabda Aparoksha. It gives you direct insight into the nature of reality, just the Mahavakya. Then there is Aham Graho Pasana techniques. you see in the Vedas are full of these techniques these are also meditation techniques, but post Vedic age they were practiced all the more. So, we have put it under post Vedic aham grahopasana itself means catching the aham what is aham I. So, how do you catch that I? Who am I? Through this these techniques. Upasana to catch the aham is aham grahopasana. How do you catch it? Through meditations like imagine a point of light in your heart. That is the light of your awareness, but you will now identify with that point of light not with this body and mind and your meditation will proceed like that gradually you will understand that that light which is me is nothing but awareness this is aham graho pasana you are identifying with something and calling it aham which leads to directly into self, the knowledge of the self. So I am giving you small bites of what you find in all these meditations. Jitna practice karoge one new world will open, I can tell you that. Then there is yogic meditations. See the word yoga comes even in the Upanishads, even in the Kathopanishad you will find, which means although in the Shat Darshan it developed as a different philosophy apart from Vedanta as a psychological philosophy, but you will find the yogic techniques in as part of Vedas in the Upanishads. So, they sort of develop together in a sense, Yog and Vedanta, are you getting the point? So, isliye bahot saare yogic techniques of dhyan developed in the post Vedic age. They have their roots in the Vedas in the Vedic age and they developed in the post Vedic age. The common practices of dhyan jo hum kehate hai na, they are all from here. Fir Kashmir Shaivism, a are all from here hm Kashmir Shaivism Kashmir Shaivism no you hear about Kashmir only for this Kashmir spiritual tradition enormous techniques they have Kashmir Shaivism has of meditation of stillness of a Shaivism the the philosophy of Kashmir Shaivism is so profound and come so close to Advait Vedant that really great yogis were produced out of this and Abhivi Aapko Jagat Jagat means at some points you will find the tradition going on. So Kashmir Shaivism, the beauty of it is very profound, very close to Vedant and great proliferation of techniques in Kashmir Shaivism. So then tantric meditations also, a number of meditations are there the paradigm I gave you shat chakra model that is also from the tantra then kundalini yoga this is similar to that shat chakra almost the same a b up come illegal post Vedic age all these were tried to understand the way your own system functions to understand the equations between vitality vital energy and awareness to understand how to unfold the highest awareness all these techniques were developed. Then you have pratik upasana you know it very well, vo jo meditation on om hai vo bhi pratik upasana hai. So, use of symbols like Om, idols, that is also a symbol of Shiva, which is a supreme state of consciousness. Please see, it is all symbolic. Shalagram, shila, natural objects, all of these were used as symbols for the highest. When you worship them and focus on them, you will be introduced to the consciousness of the highest. So, this is all medium like. So, so many meditation techniques you see. Then you have reflections and contemplations on thousand objects you will find in Hinduism is not it. Almost anything can be worshipped in Hindu way of thought. If you look upon it as a manifestation of the divine. Are you getting the point? It is not idol worship as they say, you are not worshipping the stone there, you are worshipping God as the stone, manifested as the stone, because that is your way to approach God, it is a means, you are not worshipping merely the stone, so you must understand, you must understand this first of all, hai na, iske bare mein agar kuch bhi idea nahi ho toh a lot of confusion will rain in your mind, then you have modern techniques of meditation, sagun upasana aapko patata Hai, Sagun Upasana essentially means worshipping God with attributes. Agar hum straight away Nirgun mein chale jaye, so you will have no idea, ideation will stop. So isiliye Nirgun Upasana difficult hai. Sagun Upasana means you start thinking of the great noble qualities of God, so your concentration will be easier. This is sagunupasana. Nirgunupasana means when you are able to get into the in touch with the nature of God, then you do not need to think about mere attributes. Just say now if I see you only as a good person or bad person, nice person or not so nice person, I am only thinking of attributes. But if I see you as a piece of soul, as a as a as a life, as awareness, which wears a body and mind which can be differently conditioned, variously conditioned, then it is a different way of seeing you. Vaisai bhagwan ko bhi agar aap completely nirguna malo without attributes then that is called nirguna upasana you worship him as he is as pure brahman pure being but usually people cannot conceive of this is a saguna upasana you think of him as with attributes you think of him as being so, you even give him a form, sakar upasana hai and having all these noble qualities of having full of love, full of power, full of compassion and then you relate. Now, that is why all these upasanas are there. Vipasana has branched out into very many things. So, it is also a part of modern meditation technique. Then you have Sakaar Dhyan, Bhagwan ko ek aakar dekar hum poochte hain, hai na? Why? Because you are also in an aakar and identified with it. So, you need to worship a God with form before you can transcend it. When you, your consciousness transcends your body, you will be able to worship him as he is as nirguna nirakar. Are you getting it? Japtak hum yaha par badd hai na, as long as we are confined to this body consciousness and identity of me being this particular individual, you can only worship God with form actually psychological law . So, that is why you have Sakaar Dhyan not that God has becomes has become Sakaar and standing it is your necessity your constitutional necessity and he will manifest in that form and lift your mind . So, Sakaar Dhyan, Nirakaar Dhyan, Hai, Leela Dhyan Hai, Leela you know very well, thinking of his divine play of the divine attributes of God of the lives of incarnations, these are all very practical aids to keeping your mind at a higher level. Aap jis par dhyan karoge na uske tendencies attributes aapme a jayenge. Ab aap kis par dhyan karte ho? I know what you dhyan you do. attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes attributes So, your attention is on that naturally those attributes will come into your life into your mind naturally. So, it is easy thinking of the life incidents of great personalities. If you are inspired by the great, you will become great. If you are inspired by the cheap, you will become cheap. Are you understanding this law so be careful then Vijnanabhairava is an actual technique for reaching Shiva consciousness, Shivoham it is an actual technique I cannot do it here but I am telling you it is a it is a tremendous technique then of course transcendental meditations are there Mahesh Yogi ka naam aapne suna hoga so those meditations which take you naturally into the transcendent state of consciousness. So all these are the techniques of meditation available. Now I will go to the final portion of this theory you see how does yoga see the human problem? See you must catch this point, kyunki ye aapke test mein aa sakta hai. Okay, how does yoga philosophy actually see the human problem? Whatever problems we have, how do they see it? They see the human being as a coming together of purusha and Prakriti, which means Purusha means consciousness, our own consciousness, which we are actually. And Prakriti is everything that is not consciousness, which means our mind, it means our body, it means all the senses and motor organs, it means this world of objects, 24 cosmic principles, everything is Prakriti. Only consciousness is the Purusha, everything else is Prakriti. Now when these two come together, Purusha and Prakriti, you have the manifestation of life. So consciousness has got mixed up with that which is jada not conscious. So yog actually means the separation of Purusha and Prakriti which means you are extracting consciousness from the jada vastu from the mind. So when Purusha and Prakriti come together avidya is generated this is how they will put it. Ignorance comes. Why? Because the conscious and non-conscious has mixed up. It will lead to kleshas. Kleshas are the afflictions of your mind. Raag, dvesh, abhinivesh, asmita, anger, attachments. Here raag means actually attachment, raag, dvesh, hatred, abhinivesh, fear, fear of death and all this and then asmita, ego, avidya, ignorance all this will come into your life because purusha and prakriti have come together. You are mistaking mind to be the self. You are mistaking body to be the self. So self-knowledge is not there. The knowledge of Purusha is not there. You are mistaking Prakriti to be Purusha. So that is why the Kleshas have come. This is how yoga sees the human problem. So then what is the remedy Ashtang Yoga? the human problem. So, then what is the remedy Ashtang Yoga? When you practice these steps of yoga and come to Samyama, what will happen? You will be able to separate consciousness from that which is not consciousness. Isilaya Samadhi, the result of Ashtang Yoga is Samadhi. It is called Samadhi Matram in my Patanjali which means that Samadhi which you get as a result of Ashtang Yog but which is not the end. Iske baad you know this is only the basic scheme of Yog Sutras. Iske baad ek advance scheme hai but to get this basic only is so difficult in experience. But you must have a general knowledge that is why I am giving you these slides. See if the question is how does yoga see the human problem? This is how it sees it. The coming together of Purusha and Prakriti, consciousness and that which is non-conscious by itself. See your mind now I am saying is non- by itself because mind is prakriti. So, it is is a non conscious by itself according to all these philosophies you must remember consciousness is always apart from mind, but reflects in the mind. So, mind appears to have become conscious because your mind is always not conscious to the same degree it fluctuates that itself means consciousness is not its property it is borrowed property it is called extrinsic property of mind. So consciousness is only the self it belongs to the Purusha and mind borrows consciousness and becomes conscious that's why you have various degrees of consciousness. You know now when you go back to your room after all these classes you will be so exhausted only partially conscious then for some time unconscious then again tomorrow morning when you wake up again conscious. So, if consciousness was a property of your mind, these states would not occur. The fact is consciousness reflects in your mind to the extent mind is clear it will reflect that much consciousness. Abhi mind clear hai, isliye sabhi jagrat avastha mein ho aur achi tarah sun rahe ho. After sometime it would not be like that. Is not it? So, are you getting the point, intrinsic property means what is always constantly with the thing, consciousness is not intrinsic property of your mind, please note this, with all this figurative language you know this is all it is your own experience, please check and see, so this is the basic scheme of Patanjali Yog Sutras Purusha and Prakriti came together generated avidya. So, the the basic density of our mind no clarity and full of unnecessary thought. So, many worries unproductive worries and very busy mind which I cannot stop this is avvindya fundamentally it leads to kleshas all sorts of emotional afflictions achha nahi lagta hai and bore ho jate ho and ye nahi achha lagta ho nahi achha lagta and mind is flitting from thought to thought all kleshas attachments fears worries everything so the remedy then is Ashtang yoga isko practice karo ye sab clear ho jay is Ashtang Yoga, we discussed, those who missed out the last class please see the video, then you go to the result of Ashtang Yoga, the final destination is Samadhi, as a result you are able to separate Purusha and Prakriti as a result of Samadhi, which means such total focus on the goal that you understand your own Prajna is generated, you know, you understand your own nature is pure awareness, it is not the mind. So with the experience of this Samadhi Matram, Pragnya rises, higher awareness rises. So, that is why the yoga after this is called Sampragnath Yoga. So, that is part of the advanced scheme of Patanjali Yoga Sutras. Because how can yoga is a enormous system I am telling you, in 4-5 lectures you cannot conclude it but somehow I am trying so that you do not miss out on the essential knowledge. So you see the next slide it will oh sorry yes this slide is the advanced scheme of Patanjali Yoga Sutras once prajna is generated by samadhi you enter sampragnath yog the result of sampragnath yog will be ritambara prajna which means an even more deepened version of that prajna which it is actually called truth bearing intuition it will give you insight into the nature of the purusha your own being pure consciousness as a result you develop vivek khyati look at the diagram there vivek khyati means your ability to distinguish between awareness and buddhi buddhi sattva your ability to distinguish between your own real nature as awareness and the higher intelligence that is reflecting it and claiming to be I. So it is a tremendous state of consciousness. Please understand. May I say simple words may bol rahi hoon aapko. Then as a result of vivekhyati you enter asam prajnaat yog which means you have gone far beyond the ordinary prajna and as a result you get the complete knowledge of self of the purusha self knowledge is got so you leave behind prakriti separation of purusha and prariti is what is called Kaivalya, liberation. In the sense the self is liberated from the clutches of Prakriti. This is what is called self-knowledge or Mukti. Traditional terms may seek of Mukti Kaivalya. Iska matlab self-knowledge, the self is now liberated from Prakriti, what it is not but it got identified with from that it is liberated. So, aaj bhi agar aap you go to the rural life of India you will see find people who will tell you jeevan ka maksad hai mukti ye sab unko pata nahi hai lekin unko pata hai ye kuch aise cheez hai so elevating and and so high that only can be the goal of human life this is the filter rate of our great spiritual traditions that even the common man is able to say that Mercedes can be on the way so the point is this the what they are speaking of here is the highest level of your own existence you are capable of this is called be up you are just getting introduced to it a little bit of yoga you will understand it better but you must have some knowledge of the great spiritual traditions of India yog is the way to penetrate into your own being to get self knowledge and who's not wanting self knowledge tellledge tell me the problem is there is no knowledge available that's why they are putting it on YouTube let anybody who wants it let them have it you know hundred years back this was not there neither the technology was there nor the tendency to do this was there this was very esoteric knowledge, had to go to the Himalayas and that too after a lot of years of penance knowledge Himalaya knowledge Himalaya Himalaya Himalaya Himalaya Himalaya Himalaya Himalaya Himalaya Himalaya Himalaya Himalaya Himalaya Himalaya just like how you if you have a whole 10 course meal in front of you you will only take as much as your stomach will fill or chinta karne ki zarurat hi nahi hai isliye this should be available to everyone Vivekananda started this please understand you do not know the contribution he has made to your nation this knowledge was considered very esoteric and not available to the common man at all. Islevo occult kind of idea is there about yog. It does nothing occult about it, there is nothing superstitious about it, there is nothing unscientific about it. It is purely scientific, logical, rational and something you can do. In the first person only you can understand these things through practice, but the theory you should know, this is the whole point. So, today's class we will stop here, we have come to the end of what exactly the aim of yoga is and how it is studied, what the techniques are. You can do your own exploration on this, find out things for yourself. Tomorrow onwards, we will be going into mind management techniques and the practice of Pratyahara and Dharana. This is what I want to do for you before in the next two sessions. So, it is something you have to do and practice even when the classes are not there. Mind management techniques will be given to you and practice of pratyahara and dharana will be given to you. The more you practice, the better knowledge of this you will get. Is this clear? So, practice nahi karenge toh bas this is another thought construct you know like a vritti. Wo udh jayegi jab physics and mathematics and nuclear physics So, if practice is there, this will stabilize and you will understand it is part of life. It is not a philosophy of life, it is a way of life, a way of a better life, towards a better life. So, we will stop the class here.
 Thank you. Om Asato Maa Sadgamaya Tamaso Maa Jyotir gamaya mrityor ma amritam gamaya om shante shante shante he . So, today's two talks are on mind management . Mind management includes all types of management, do you understand this? It includes your stress management, time management, ambiguities management, all types of management because if you can handle your mind, you can handle everything, right. So, today we will be giving you techniques for this this very practical techniques and they are being applied across a whole lot of universities are asking for courses like this. So, actually a lot of students are practicing this everywhere because the mind has tendency to go into such states unless you do something about it you know you you can get blown away. So, these techniques gradually we will practice I just want to give you some background information which is important to practice the technique. For that I will be showing you two more slides you must understand the nature of your mind why does it behave like that and why the need to take conscious effort to control it? Otherwise it will go on in its own way. Have you heard the word compulsive? Yes, compulsive means as if you are being compelled to do something, you are not in conscious control, you are just being led by your by something else some other force as it were. So, this is see everybody's mind this happens. So, do not think ah you are do not feel guilty about it or that it is happening only to you. Everybody's mind is like that the nature of mind is it is prakriti, prakriti means movement, prakriti means change. So, its nature is like this always changing, modifying, but to some extent you must bring order into it. If you want to achieve your goals, otherwise it can go anyway. So, those techniques we will be discussing. See from the yogic standpoint how do they see mind mind mind Sanskrit me even in the yogasutras the commentaries you will find this language because it is your inner organ just like in the body you have so many organs isn't it heart liver so many lungs that is why it is working the way it is working. So, like that you have an internal organ which is not visible, it is called mind, antah karan hai ye. And why is it not visible? Can you see mind? Lekin you have thoughts which means there is something called mind, isn't it? Mind is nothing, but bundle of thoughts. So, when you have thoughts there is something called there is a background to it, there is a mind. It is in the manomayakosh of your personality that is why you cannot see it. It is as it were another body you are wearing. So, you know everything through it, you have perceptions through it, you have cognitions through it, but you do not know, you do not know it as such per se because you cannot see it. But we will know all that there is the information is there about mind and we will see how practical it is to understand it this way. In yoga, please see this slide, the nature of mind according to yoga. So, they have divided mind into its functional aspects, four aspects of the mind. You can say like four components. The first is the manas. Manas ka matlab hai cogitative aspect. Sankalpa vikalpa atmika antah karna vritti that is the definition of manas, wo sankalpa vikalpa karta rehta hai, it keeps modifying and thinking your normal thought process considering the pros and cons of everything, this modification is called manas, this modification of your mind is called manas. The cogitative aspect which enables thinking, analysis, normal thought, but there is there are specialized thought processes like the second one you see buddhi, it is called the nishchayatmika antahkaranavrithi which means where you come to a decision the determinative aspect of your mind. It is your mind only, but it has come now to a halt because you have thought out something completely and it is ready to take a decision. So, isko buddhi kehte hain the determinative aspect That is not all Then your mind is loaded with memories, isn't it? Chitta, that is called as the Chitta aspect of your mind Not Chit, Chittam it is actually in Sanskrit But we are saying Chitta in English So mind, intellect, Chitta Chitta is called as the Anusandha Anatmika Antahkarna Vritti hai. Iska matlab hai it is your memory bank. It is loaded with all the experiences of the past. Some of which are have come out on the conscious plane, some of which are hidden. You do not know much about them. But they are there. At one time they were your vrittis. You put them into the subconscious by repeating them now they are they live there as your sanskars and they become your memories after some time. So, this aspect of the mind is so important because you know most of your thinking is unfoldment of this aspect memory. Think and see most of your thoughts are memories. So, this is a huge chunk of your mind you can say 75 percent mind is chittam and then you have ahankar which is the ahad ahamadmi kantakarna vritti hi you can call it ego it is actually the self referential aspect of your mind, jo aham ke da hai, I, you see everything becomes important when it is connected to I, is not it? I am this, I am like this, I do this, yeh mera qualification hai, yeh mera status hai, and I am going to become this, I, this I I I this is the self referential aspect called ahankar toh yeh chaar aspects hai aapke mind ke now please see they are functional aspects of your mind your mind functions through these four man buddhi chitta ahankar makes mind all together. See, yoga is very practical I told you, it is analyzing your mind bit by bit, what are its different aspects and how is it functioning. See, all these aspects you know, they are connected with each other, your manas, buddhi, chitta will function according to your ahankar, your aham sense. Today, you are student of IIT, you will be in a one particular way. Tomorrow, you will be in some particular job, you your identity will change. This will become memory that I am M. Tech from IIT's memory now. Then after that you will have another bigger identity, a family identity, then your status you will get some award, you will go somewhere and you will you will go on developing identities. According to your identity ahankar your manas, buddhi, chitta will work. They will defend that identity, they will work for that identity so easily a identity aspect hain aapka it is a very important part of your mind if you have a big identity a large identity your manas buddhi chitta will work in a large way in a big way if you have small identities only they will work in a large way in a big way if you have small identities only they will work in a small way. Isi le pehle pehle during in our education began with some giving you some amount of your knowledge of yoga and Vedanta. Vedic education always was like that. you were given a global identity Aham Brahmasmi, my real nature is Brahman, I am functioning through this body-mind complex but I am actually that, then naturally you will encompass everybody because everybody is actually that in one particular name and form. So, this arriving at a global identity in your mind is very important, not just creating a global village externally where you still are locked up in your little family or little home, not willing to share even with your neighbor, global identity you must be see this is part and parcel of your own culture I am telling you where you are given a global identity. So, that your mind broadens expands it is becomes inclusive able to include everybody Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam was the what is the outcome of this global identity that every being is my family, the whole world is mine, I am related to it, I am not functioning like on an island, what others are producing I am consuming, even energy wise you are doing that, action wise you are doing that. So, it is so important that your mind functions in this way, is not it? Inclusively because I told you your intelligence will decide tomorrow's society. So, it better be good and it better be large, broad, inclusive. inclusive, small identities you know you lose everything by keeping very small identities life is about manufacturing growing to your full potential manufacturing your true self so that is why the nature of the mind the nature of each of these aspects of the mind is very important. Look at this chittam, you know how it works, your memory bank, your whole life it is your storehouse as it were, you will keep drawing from that. So, is not it important you you manufacture good memories, so that life achi ho, hamesha mann prasanna ho, to uske liye aapko kya karna chahiye, you must change your conscious manas aspect so that you see the vrittis you create there are going to go into your subconscious and become sanskars and memories to take charge of the conscious thinking aspect see that is why these insights are so very important what is the nature of the mind how is it functioning and your buddhi see if the buddhi is working on limited identity it is what is called the selfish buddhi the selfish genes will become very small too small it doesn't befit you but if you have a global identity you will have a broad mind naturally so you should know how yoga is seeing your mind the essential thing about yoga is to expand your consciousness in such a way you become nothing but a blessing for this earth and not my little success and my little job titles and my little award and my little I little karte karte karte bahut hi chote ho jaoge even now you see these are the basic leadership lessons being taught in management courses that You will become very small by doing little Otherwise you will small a small identity is no identity . So, this is the nature of your mind according to yoga. Along with this knowledge I also want to give you some knowledge of western psychology because they have studied in a very nice way ah look at this slide. They have studied the nature of the mind, Freud and others have made this contribution. Mind has three levels, the conscious mind, the subconscious mind and the unconscious mind. Conscious mind is just a the tip of the iceberg, please see. What you are conscious of is very little portion, under that is a large subconscious and beyond that is the unconscious which you know nothing about . Now, when you have such a small strip of conscious mind obviously, your experiences will be very limited . This is a fact only for the untrained mind please know this. In yoga when you train your mind, why yoga does not speak of these three levels you know, because their object is to train your mind in such a way the subconscious will become conscious. The unconscious will come to the subconscious and become conscious, then only you are living life otherwise you are living only a bit of life . See if you are only half alive, how will living be or if you are quarter alive only part of your mind is functioning, you are not at all living actually you are just existing it's not life so please understand you can make the subconscious conscious how by yoga actually yog means this and make the unconscious first into subconscious and then conscious fully conscious so yog aims at producing the fully conscious human being which means full life half dazed half sleepy state you cannot enjoy any life please know that you know in a half dreamy half ah awakened state can you enjoy anything for that matter. So, abhi vahi avasasta a half the mind is somewhere other half is wrongly conditioned you get very little out of life you can't even enjoy the normal everyday aspects of life if you are not fully awake alive so please understand conscious mind co-manufacture Kar, making the mind conscious is the purpose of yoga So they won't dwell so much on this aspect But they will give you the means to make your mind fully conscious Otherwise, if you are in this state, that's a sick mind Huge subconscious is there there filled with all sorts of rubbish unconscious so any action of that person is being infel from a from very wrong conditioned processes so he is not happy what he is doing have you I don't know you may not be knowing do you know criminal psychology is like that? He doesn't know what he is doing. Control is out of question because conscious mind is hardly there and the unconscious is full of rubbish. So he isn't even aware of what he is doing. You ask any criminal criminal he will tell you this Us samay mein mujhe pata nahi tha maini yeh kyu kya so you can reduce yourself to this kind of state also you know this is like an completely animal instinctual state that just you do something without knowing the human being means one who has become fully conscious mere man mein kya hoaha hai, kya bhavnaaye hain, kyu mere actions aise hain, he should be fully conscious of it. Then only human being. Human being means one who is completely evolved, the acme of creation, one who knows how to be, one who knows, who is fully conscious of life. So, when you are fully conscious you will function magically very differently . So, that is why please understand the nature of mind can be modified can be changed to through training. Today I am going to give you a small snippet of this training which is you will practice pratyahar ah the the first 4 steps of yoga ah we will we will go through that once again and something of that you will practice here. So, that see in the next lecture you will practice some amount of dharana and in the final talks we will actually practice meditation but step by step only you can go because the nature of the mind is to keep running I told you know many tracks are in operating even now so now you we have to bring them all into one track Uske liye hum practice karenge This background knowledge you should just keep it in your mind. Now look at this. The practice of mindfulness first. This is our actual practice. Step by step we are going to practice. Actually I am going to introduce you to yoga practice. But why I am calling it mindfulness you know. Because you are only acquainted with this term. If I say that we are giving a yogic practice. At once people will think all sorts of things about yoga, but you at least you know what is mindfulness. What is mindfulness? Being fully present at the present moment you are just reverted and in full attention which which means fully aware that is mindfulness. So, this state we will try to generate through yogic practice I I will want you to do it right here hm but is a preliminaries I have already told you yam niyam are the preliminaries for this if you actually want the state of yoga, you must satisfy these conditions for the simple reason your mind will remain stable in this these states for that simple reason. Because you know Vivekananda used to say do you know how the nature of the mind is it is like a lake. If the lake has too many waves can you see the bottom and also if the lake is turbid can you see the bottom? No. So, lake should not have turbulence which means no waves on the surface and it should be clean water should be clean not turbid. If these two conditions are satisfied you can see what is at the bottom. So also if your mind lake has stopped its modifications on the surface and has cleaned up through Yam and Niyam, then you will see the self, the foundation of your mental thought process, the awareness that you are, you can get a glimpse into that is a young man young hair not to bring about some restricting or imposing something restricting your freedom do not take it like that it is just a little change of your lifestyle so that you develop sattvic habits and so that you are able to do actually do yoga. So that is why these preconditions and then asan. Actually speaking I would prefer you sat in the actual Padmasana posture but it is okay here I do not know how you can sit. So just sit straight. Sit straight come on all of you . Yes. So, once once you sit straight your your backbone the the spinal cord it should remain straight not drooping . So, the neck head everything will remain straight hm see fundamentally why is this done a basic asana then you can keep your legs this way or down or anything, but your back should be straight, the spine should be straight. Why? So that your vitality vital energy is able to move upward, your spine is really the axis of your personality. Keep it straight you will see you suddenly become alert naturally. So, this is asan, any asan you can adopt after this but spine should be straight neck and head should be straight okay then now we will practice a pranayama anulom vilom very easy pranayama see I want you to know certain fundamental things about your breath because you know nothing about your own breath because it is running automatically you don't have to do anything so you don't know anything about it only if it falters or stops then it will become an emergency but because why it is going on automatically is it has become a reflex action of your nervous system it's going on but do you know there are certain marvelous things about your own breathing which you should know before we start the pranayama. Do you know how many times you breathe in one minute? Any idea? 12 to 15. Yes, yes between 15 and 16 times normally a normal adult breathes. When you are doing a lot of activity or a very angry or all things are going on in the head too many things, then it will be more than that. That is why mind will become restless. Your breath and mind are directly connected please understand. It is the link breath is the link between the body and mind. If it is regulated mind will come into your hands. So, if you are breathing normally 15, 16 times per minute yes mind is relatively poised and calm not turbulent. You you can see when you are over restless you you just check your breathing and see that time you are gasping almost it may fast breathing children many times are in those states you know they are out of breath many times for the simple reason mind is overactive, but you as young adults you should have this poise always calmness balance the thought process . Now for a yogi do you know how many times he breathes in one minute between 6 and 11 he will not go above 11. Thought and mind are connected I told you, I mean thought and breath. So, when you reduce your breathing, automatically your thoughts are coming to a very steady state, no rushing, no worrying, no overthinking, no opposite thinking and no unproductive thinking. It is if it is meaningful thinking, your breath will naturally come down in a line the thoughts are going. Not that you are a linear thinker only, you may be a very creative thinker, but there is no onrush of thoughts, they are very steady. So, between 6 and 10, if you can come, if the breath comes down, you will get the state of mind naturally. Now you must understand something about the breathing mechanism also, kyunki aapko sirf pata hai aap oxygen lete ho aur carbon dioxide you let out, that is you know that is to do with air. What about your breathing apparatus? What happens when you inhale? When you take in breath, what happens is, see your diaphragm actually contracts, so the chest cavity expands. So, your chest, lungs and stomach muscles will expand. Expansion of these three, if you have a pet at home, a dog or a cat, just when they are sleeping you watch them breathe, this is what will happen. Suddenly the stomach will swell up and go down, swell up, go down. So, this is what happens when you inhale the entire upper respiratory tract your your chest, your lungs and the stomach muscles have expanded. When you inhale opposite happens because the diaphragm yes the opposite function happens to the diaphragm, it expands. So, the chest cavity will contract. So, all of these will contract your lungs, your chest and your stomach. So, this movement is going on rhythmically, when you get super excited this will become very fast and its impact will be there on all these organs. So, isiliye thoda steadiness, see becoming mature means becoming more and more steady and poised in life. I told you many times not gathering too much information because other ways you can gather information you must be able to process the information you have gathered, that steadiness you must have not that you should not gather in from of course, you should, but your your mental thought process should remain steady and not go berserk. So, this you will get just by the practice of pranayam steady breathing we will practice this first and then go into Anulom Vilom. Brahmari Pranayam I am not going to teach you this section, but the next talk there you will learn that because that has very special characteristics. So now, close your eyes straight back should be straight, keep your fingers like this on your lap chin mudra this is and just watch your breath, when you watch it, it will calm down. Normal breathing, these 20-25 years you never paid attention to your breath now you will see just when you are breathing like this you have calmed down now I will introduce the pranayama to you it will further regulate your breathing so that it will calm down further just open your eyes and see this mudra this is called nasagraha mudra or Vishnu mudra two names are there please put your fingers into this mudra. See the forefinger and middle finger are touching this the lower part of the thumb. The ring finger and the little finger are straight. Yes. Yes, this is the mudra, see every action you do has some effect on you, these mudras are special inventions to calm you, this mudra, Nasagraha mudra is used for all pranayam, with this we will perform the pranayam, everyone Everyone see these two index finger and middle finger you have to just put it here that is all that is nasagraha mudra. Yes everyone. Now this you will hold it here on your nose. For pranayama very specific breathing technique is described. So, in anulom vilom the technique is you will take in a big breath close the through the left nostril close the left nostril you will leave the breath through the right nostril again you will breathe in through the right close the right nostril and breathe out through the left. Let us do this. Aise rakhiye jisse aap close kar sage theek tarah se. Come on take a deep breath from the right nostril, breathe out. Breathe in through the right, close, breathe out through the left. This is one cycle. Repeat this seven times. Come on. Breathe in, close, breathe out, breathe in, close, breathe out, breathe in, close, breathe out. Breathe in, close, breathe out, breathe in, close, breathe out, breathe in, close, breathe out, breathe in, close, breathe out Yes, 7 cycles done Usually when you breathe, you are in through both both nostrils and breathing out through both, but unevenly. One nostril will take in more air usually 70 percent 30 percent like that and this mechanism switches throughout the day it is called the nasal cycle, but in this pranayama we have restricted the movement of breath so the air is come going in a particular way so when you practice this pranayama deep inner calmness becomes possible abap beto jaise pehle bet rai the close your eyes sit sit straight, you'll see your breathing has come to a far lower level, which means you are breathing only few times, not restlessly, just normal breathing, deep breathing, number of breaths per minute has come down. Now we will practice Pratyahara means withdrawal of mind and senses from objects and concentration on one particular object. So you will concentrate only on your breath and do not bring any other thought into your mind. Sit still and straight, this will automatically happen. Just focus on the steadiness of your breath. When breath is long drawn out, mind will become empty. Focus on the breath. Just watch how calm you have become. Just observe the breath. Okay, I can see most of you have done it well now slowly open your eyes see what happened in these few minutes you did it just for four five minutes what happened you became to a standstill just by turning your mind away from other things watching your breath which means your mind has this capacity to withdraw and focus attention right this is Pratyahara when you do this for a long time just now you did it for four minutes if you do it for ten minutes you will become capable of dharana mind is not rushing here and there isn't it a very calming state we're the case students they but I are the first time in my life I got some calmness So understand that your own mechanism will produce calmness for you if you know how to handle it So first thing what did we do? We fixed the asana Right, then we breathed, we took our breath in a very particular manner, we practiced one pranayama, so our level of breathing became even more calm, even more steady, then we just focused on the breath, so pratyahara very simple, 3 steps only, practice this for some time and I will also teach you the dharana aspect today, how thought current can be maintained continuously on something, but that will be in the next class, but fundamentally you must get this capacity. Whenever you feel mind is in turmoil, circumstances are in turmoil, you know when mind is in turmoil it makes you feel like the outer person is in turmoil the circumstances are in turmoil . This is the justification of the mind no matter what is happening I should be balanced to take the right decision is not it. Please understand this tomorrow in your workplace, you calm down first, you must manufacture it yourself wherever you are to take the right decision sometimes split decisions you have to take you must be calm balanced, whatever is happening outside it is outside external to you This is fundamental to taking right decision making, do you know? Otherwise, you are being carried away by opinions, just blown away. Do not do these silly things because your role will be very crucial tomorrow. So, first calm down, just check your breathing, you will calm down, Pratyahara technique okay. Now let us go into some more knowledge about these things, Kyuki the dharana will be taught to you in the next class. Now let just focus on this, Kya hua isko? What happened to it? Yes, see no matter how much I teach you concentration Your attitude if it is not right Your thought emerging from those attitudes is like a grid you know attitude in your own mind It will not be positive Positive thinking is a huge problem with people today only because . So, it is they are functional predispositions which function like grids through which your thoughts pass. So, if you have a very positive good attitude to life the right attitude, then your thoughts you know thodi negativity hui kuch achcha nahi laga, does not matter your attitude will change, your attitude will bring out very very good behavior from you, very good outcome, but if attitude only is corrupt, attitude is bad, negative, then you know no amount of mind management will bring you to the success story which I am speaking of . The actual ah you can say the grid through which your thoughts will pass, keep it always oriented towards good things in life, positive things in life. Do not dwell on the negative. Many times you know practically we tell people ki thoda sa wo apna apke breaking news kam karke dwell on your own mind, your own thought process, your own breathing, this is so important. Constantly taking information from outside that also if it is only negative information gradually your mind will become negative . You become demoralized in a sense . So, that is why these all these points which I am giving you become very important . You must always expect the great and the good then only your thinking will become positive . So, never think or I mean talk in the negative, oh the world is going to dogs, everything is like this. Ye aapki paribhasha nahi honi chahiye. This attitude is really like a grid. So, vo fundamental grid bahut positive hone se always you will have high energy you know. So, your thoughts will always be positive. You remember this equation toxic thoughts lead to negative emotions which lead to low energy and hence depression. Positive thoughts, positive attitude and positive thoughts will lead always to positive emotions hence high energy and a bubbling joy of life so attitude should always be made check your attitude is Kelly meditations be hotel where they are affirmative meditations constantly you will say life has been so bountiful to me you know what a great blessing your life is and what you have been blessed with have you ever thought about it? see you are in such a premier excellent Institute tomorrow you are going to be great you're going to make vast changes for this world you have such a great life in front of you Abhi yahaan baith kar to go into all sorts of negative whirlpools and go into depression it is a kind of madness I'm telling you, ek taraka addiction hai ye to keep lamenting on something or the other so all you have to do for the right attitude is you have to practice being grateful in life iska matlab hai rojh thank karna, kin ko thank roadstand Karna to everyone you do not know you feel you have been funded by your parents to be here, but they themselves are the product of so, the efforts of so, many people is not it everything coming into your life it it is actually the labor of so many people so always appreciate the good in others be grateful to the services of others yet or teach or teach is a good practice colonel right attitude will always be there be appreciative is for savoring both the hem which means with joy you should appreciate all the good in your life so we have not seen the other side of life that is why you don't know where you stand actually, be grateful for that everyday basis if you practice this, be appreciative, even a person gives you a glass of water you should have the feeling of thanking thankfulness and B savor that moment who's go don't you know many people take it for granted don't then only you will become fully conscious of life right attitude month come at love hey you are savoring you are appreciative youoring, you are appreciative, you are grateful, you are thankful, you will remain positive. If this is not there in life, if you have a thousand good things in your life, you will still say that I didn't get that. He got this, but I didn't get that. You can put yourself into as much depression as you want I am telling you by all these silly ways of thinking, but attitude fundamentally should be like this. Gratefulness, appreciation of the efforts of others, thankfulness and always in that a attitude of humility you approach life not as if oh I deserve this that is why it is coming to me please understand you are purely a product of the efforts of others so you must practice this Jinn ke life mein gratefulness nahi hota hai unke life mein attitude nahi hoti hai tomorrow when today when you are grateful, tomorrow you will contribute to making others happy. So, attitude, main thing before we begin, mind management class, see most of you will have this question in the mind, brain or mind connection, because further on you are going to learn mind management techniques, see brain and mind what is the connection, brain is the hardware and mind is the software, brain is like the instrument in your hands and ah the mind is almost like the software and also like the electromagnetic network which is bringing you all the information, which is bringing the information into the instrument. So, depending upon what you think according to the that your brain, I told you your brain is modified, it is neuroplastic, it changes according to your learning, your your cognitions, it changes according to that that it is neuroplastic by nature. So, you actually rewire your brain through your mind is there any other way of rewiring it tell me hm ah research institute can you put positivity into your brain somehow electrode connection can you ah can you inject happiness into your brain . Only by thinking rightly you can become all this you can change your brain only through your mind you can rewire your brain only through your mind please remember you don't experience happiness as a short of dopamine you that you learn through science third-person perspective ever you experience it only as a lightness in your heart as a buoyancy in your spirit you experiences that it has sheer joy of life. First person experience happiness. So you can only do it if your mind is like that. You can become happy only through your mind. This is what I am trying to say. So do not think that Frankenstein what all is there in they used to be novels. Now I think they are movies. In those movies you all third person perspective. You inject the brain with this and suddenly that person becomes happy. Aise kabhi nahi hota hai. You can only become happy if you have a good mind. You know, a clean conscience will give you more joy than all the joy of philosophy and science a clean conscience to easily manco manage carne ca tarika you must learn this this is why I have given you this slide you can only rewire your brain through your mind there is no other way cultivate the right habits right thought process right emotions and you will feel the glory of life it will make you more conscious from within you will feel the glory of life. It will make you more conscious from within. You will understand the joy of awareness. When people do not get all this joy, the real joy, they fall for synthetic joy. Synthetic joy ka matlab hai? O drugs chahiye, drinks chahiye, sex chahiye, ye sab chahiye in order to become a little engagement. So, do not reduce yourself into these miserable states when you are capable of original joy, you must not opt for synthetic joy, is not it? Obviously, so, learn the art of mind management that is why I am giving you so many slides here. See, the factors affecting your neural pathways, you must be aware of this. First is your learning or cognitive experiences. What is cognition? Is it the same as perception? What is the difference? Everything that you know through mind through thought activities cognition, it includes perceptions, but it also includes your analytical thinking, your reasoning capacities, everything you know through the mind is cognition. And what you know through the senses by seeing, hearing are your perceptions, right. Now, you see your the factors which affect your neural pathways are your cognitive experiences, the repetition that goes on there and your conscious attention spans. That is why it is so important to think consciously and correctly. So, that your neural pathways are positive, good, dependable and you become reliable. So, you must have this knowledge conscious attention spans is really important for them. What you do consciously will become your sanskar, it will become your memory, it will it is your treasure, it will give you a good mind. What you do subconsciously or unconsciously, you miss the whole thing. Finally you will be a product of circumstance you know and a react reaction mode you will function like that, not a proactive mode, just reacting to things. So, do not reduce yourself to those states that is why yes of gnan aapko diya jaara hai. Then you must know the law of association and conditioning. Why a person does mistakes or wrong in life is wrong conditioning. Iski waja kya hai? He has made the wrong connections in his neural pathways. So, the the actual law states neurons that fire together wire together it is it is pretty obvious is not it hm. Now, you connect this particular class with Rajayog. So, you will always remember that we had studied Rajayog in this class and we had felt good how much calmness we attained and we got so much knowledge you will remember you associated a lot of things here with that learning process. Like that you your mind automatically associates things, but if you make wrong associations hm then that produces negative conditioning. This is the cause for all negative habits associating something with something else which has no meaning. So, neurons that fire together wire together. Many people associate what they see on your movie screens with real life. Hai na? Tab gadbar toh hogi. That is a made up thing to satisfy some commercial purpose, but you are applying it to real life. What I am trying to tell you is make the right associations for the right experiences. So, remember neurons that fire together wire together, neurons that fire out of sync will fail to link very easy. And if you do not use your that particular neural activity you will lose it. Today you sat here and it felt very nice, Rajyog. After sometime you did not use it at all, it will become just one small memory. So that is why you must know what to empower in your own mind. That is why I am dwelling on this. You must learn to empower the right experiences right hm. So, these are all thefactors affecting neural pathways and this is the law of association and conditioning. Let us just go to the next one. See what causes your mind activity? What is it that makes your thoughts? These are all the inlets to your mind see the five senses what you see, what you hear, what you smell, taste and touch . They are responsible for your perceptions and then your activities what your motor organs do and your memories. These three are responsible for the thought currents of your mind. Only the intake of these three have become your thoughts. Vrittis are created only by these, the five senses, your activities and your memories. So, then you if you take charge of these, you take charge of your memories. So, then you if you take charge of these you take charge of your mind. So, you see you know the fundamental principle in your own culture was always . This is not some kind of a philosophy of life, this is the way to a good life and enriching fulfilling experience of life so once you understand the inlets of your mind you will know initiating control of mind then begins with the senses see I am not going to give you superficial answers okay if you really want a good fulfilling life and happiness It's not that you'll get it and that's it. It's not that simple. These monkeys are Gandhi's You must have heard that he used to show The first monkey is saying Listen to only good things Don't listen to bad things And of course talking also Talk the right stuff Good things, valuable things and positive things And look at only good things Because your eyes and ears are very powerful sense organs. What you see there it will get imprinted on your mind. Now, you refresh button and delete button smartphone pe hota hai yaha nah you can't delete or refresh you can't do all that it will remain as memory what you repeat in the conscious mind so take care expose yourself to the good things in life one up near such a hodja a chubby Jaya positive bun Jaya so initiating control starts with the senses, then how to change the subconscious content of your mind. Suppose you have already taken in very negative experiences what will you do then. So, for that you see I will give you an example, do not see that slide just listen to this example, you think of an ink bottle, first you will throw away the dark ink, then you fill in good water toh pehle toh dark water hi niklega haan aap jitna pour karoge little dark then lighter lighter lighter. Now, after some time after 5 minutes the good water what pure water you pour only that will come out. So, our mind also ink bottle. Now, it is full of dark ink first you pour out which means stop your association with negativity. Then go on pouring good stuff . I told you there are whole lot of very good positive things you can bring into your life, good books, good exposures, all this knowledge, good practices, good habits . You will see first initially some dark water will come out because but gradually very clear water will come out. So, you see thoughts arise in the conscious mind they are called vrittis, when repeated they sink into the subconscious to become mental impressions which are called sanskars. The sanskars again sprout in the conscious mind as thoughts which are now called memories smriti. So, you create the contents of your mind consciously. So, if you change your conscious thoughts you will gradually change your mind . This is the way to change the subconscious don't go to that astrologer and ask don't do all this just change I am telling you even if you try this for 15 days put some fresh good water into your mind and see put some fresh good water into your mind and see. Achhi cheezahi niklenge usse. So the change is in your hands. If you have understood the mechanisms which I am telling you just now, you will know how to change the ways of your mind, how to change your habits, how to change your thoughts and sanskars and memories. And you will not complain that my mind is doing this, what should I do? People say that my mind is doing this I am not like that. Is it possible? It is your mind, it has never worked on it. You have not worked on your mind. So these are all techniques for mind management, please understand. There is an ink bottle, you have to clean it. There is a way to do it. Let us do it.
 Thank you. Om Asatoma Sadgamaya Tamasoma Jyotirgamaya Mrityorma Amritam Gamaya Om Shanti Shanti Shanti He After last class I had a very interesting question which I would like to share with you all of you we were discussing that the source of happiness is consciousness but the same entity who was a source of happiness to me the same consciousness can also produce annoyance in me suppose somebody gave you a lot of happiness and consciousness was the actual factor which was giving you happiness the same entity can also annoy me at certain times, isn't it? the same person can say something which I don't like and I get angry so how can I say that what is it that is actually giving me happiness and what is it that is making me annoyed the thing is you know some particular trait of that mind I'm not liking that is producing the annoyance in me and I have equated with the person with the mind that is why I feel the pain or the annoyance or whatever you understand we equate people just with their minds and their bodies that is why I'm not able to connect in any deeper way I'm not able to see the person as consciousness enlivening a body and mind so today we will go into something from the Upanishad which will teach you how to learn to think of thick things in term in terms of their actual reality the truth behind them they are appearing as body and mind but there is some light of awareness shining through every being so this particular story which I'm taking up today it is a very important story quoted many times it is the story of Shweta Ketu some of you might have heard it's from the Chandogya Upanishad it will teach you how to think of others how to perceive this world when they make sentences like this whole world is nothing but God nothing but Brahman what do they mean we will take up this and then we will go into again yoga psychology neurophysiology your practical problems into all of that so So let us start with this very, very elevating idea from the Upanishads. Now this is the story of Shweta Ketu. He was the son of a Rishi called Uddalak, Uddalak Rishi. And this Uddalaka had great hope in his son. He was the only son and he wanted him to be a man of great learning. So he started teaching his son after sometime he thought that it's better if somebody else teaches my son he has a preceptor, a greater guru so he sends him to another very great rishi Shweta Ketu was 12 years old at that time and he goes to that preceptor, he learns many things over a period of another 12 years he learns all the subjects that were available at that time he learns the Vedic lore he learns the Upanishads, he learns about the Vedangas, the Nyaya system of thought he learns Kavya, he learns grammar, Nirukth, everything and then he comes back after 12 years. And then Uddalak notices that he is now a man of great learning. He has a tremendous intellect, but he is a little arrogant. Vidya dadati vinayam, but this boy has not got that vinay. So one day he calls Shweta Ketu to him and says look my son what have you learned and then he gives a whole list father I have learned this and this and this and then the father says very good but tell me have you learned that knowing which you know the unknowable have you perceived that perceiving which you know that which cannot be perceived merely by the senses but which gives you complete fulfillment have you known that and then Shweta Ketu says no father I have not heard even of anything like this I do not know what you are speaking about then Uddalak says did not your teachers mention anything about it and he said may be they did not know anything of this kind what you are talking about what is it that you're talking about and then the father said look as by knowing one lump of clay you know everything that that clay is made up of so also there is one substance knowing which you will know the actual essential essence of everything in this world of manifestation. So then Shweta Ketu thought this is something very interesting but what is this please explain it to me and then we will stop the story here to go into the explanation. Knowing one lump of clay you come to know everything that that clay is made up of this is what he is saying, isn't it? Now you just take this thought into your mind What is the meaning of this? Suppose we make something out of clay Suppose we make a pot or we make a ladle or we make a jar Now the claim, the Rishi is saying If you know its essential content which is clay, you will know everything about this the formations of clay, the pot, the ladle whatever. Now, what is he trying to say tell us here? You see let us just take the example of a pot. Is a pot different from clay? Yes. different from clay? Clay in a particular formation is called pot. Clay with a name and a form and a function is called pot. Is there a separate reality called pot apart from clay? No. Clay pot is nothing but clay in another form, with another name, with another function. Now tell me one thing, I will ask you a few questions based on this. Can I say that that thing which is appearing as pot to you, is it more clay or is it more pot? Think and tell me, it is more clay. Why? Because the clay can exist apart from pot, but the pot cannot exist apart from clay, it is only clay, it is through and through clay, it is clay in a particular shape and form and name. So the clay is the reality about the pot. Let me put another question here, corresponding to this word called pot, is there a separate entity? Suppose you do not think of clay for the moment, corresponding to this idea of pot, is there a separate entity? Suppose you do not think of clay for the moment, corresponding to this idea of pot, the name of pot, is there a thing separate from clay? Is there an entity separate from clay? Is there something called potness apart from clay? Can you show me the pot? If I say I will take off the clay, you show me the pot, can you show me the pot, if I say I will take off the clay you show me the pot, can you show me? No. There is nothing called pot apart from clay, see this, there is nothing called a wave apart from water, there is nothing called ornaments apart from gold, there is nothing called color apart from electromagnetic radiation it appears as color to your equipment so also there is no nothing called a world apart from Brahman existence consciousness and bliss and you are that Shweta Ketu he says you are that Brahman appearing as this particular entity with this name this form they are talking about you, you are that essential consciousness appearing in this form you see you you were not born with a label isn't it a name was given to you as you grew up you attained a particular form you got a particular personality these are all upadhis added on to you what is your essential substance it is that consciousness just like how there is nothing called a pot apart from clay there is nothing called a wave apart from water there is nothing called you apart from consciousness essentially the name, form, function everything changes isn't it? So then now can I say, observe this carefully, can I say that the pot is an appearance of clay? I can say that, I can say that the wave is an appearance of water or the bubble is an appearance of water. I can say that color is an appearance of electromagnetic radiation I can say you are an appearance in Brahman the supreme reality this is Advaita Vedanta for you, you are nothing but that supreme reality in a particular name and form you are an appearance of that supreme truth this is your real identity the unchanging part of you is that consciousness the light in your eyes you are more the light in your eyes than you are those eyes learn to identify yourself with this you see this is what Vedanta is pointing you towards your own unchanging identity is this you see how logically they have led you to this this point this is the teaching being given by the Rishi to his son learn to identify yourself properly even logically you are you can understand you are functioning as a pot you have invested your entire energy into that formation called pot that name called pot but the essential thing about the pot its essence is the clay. If you give too much importance only to the name and form and function, you will lose sight of the essential element, the substance, the substratum, the clay. So, learn to identify yourself rightly first, unless you have asked who am I, you will not track the actual subject, unless you know the subject am I you will not track the actual subject unless you know the subject how will you relate properly with the object with the objective world you see this is the next step which is going to teach Shweta Ketu how to relate with others if you have not identified yourself properly known yourself as you truly are the unchanging you unless you have at least an idea of this how will you relate with others properly when when he gives this knowledge to Shweta Ketu his ears perk up Shweta Ketu and because he's an intelligent young boy and he tells his father tell me more about this father what is this reality about me which I am seeing I am seeing the clay only as the pot, tell me more about this clayness and then Udalak Rishi tells him my son you see this huge Nagrodha tree, Nagrodha means banyan tree, all of you have seen banyan trees, so you see this huge tree, now come on get me a fruit of that tree and he runs up and gets a fruit of the tree then he says cut open that fruit tell me what is there seeds are there the seeds are so tiny now break open a seed what do you find there a tinier portion a tinier reductionist technique of science cut open that and see what is there finally well I don't see anything then the Rishi says Uddalak says that which you are saying I don't see anything that thing has the potency of this huge tree it is unseeable maybe you can't see it with these ordinary eyes you cannot know it just like that because you can't see it but it holds the potency toency to manifest as this entire tree Vivekananda used a word for this, he said the tree is an evolved form of that which you cannot see that is an involved potency which manifests as the tree involution he called it. So you see the actual potency of something which is vast and manifest can be something which you cannot even see, but that holds the essence and something like your genetic code you see that is responsible for the whole human being, is not it? It is already written encrypted there what that human being will be like. Can you see your genes or the chromosomes? You cannot see your genetic code, but you have instruments to track it so also the essential you you cannot see it you cannot hear it so long it's it has not been perceptible to the senses you cannot find it through the senses but you can intuit it through your own mind through meditation you can turn your mind back to that source and that is the real you, tat tvam asi shvetaketu he says you are that essence which is manifesting as this tree which is manifesting as a human being even as you cannot see the essence of the tree in that seed you cannot see your essence just now as an objective reality outside of you the sandrshetishthati roopamasya chakshushapashyati kashchanainam you cannot see it as an object in front of you you cannot see it as these with these eyes because they are trained only to see objective reality they are turned outward isn't it but this essence is right within you because consciousness is your essence you function as conscious beings your mind becomes conscious your body becomes enlivened you are that consciousness O Shweta Ketu he is telling you you are that Tatva Masi Shweta Ketu now Shweta Ketu got all the more interested oh he's talking about my real essence so he said tell me more about this and then Uddalak Muni said okay son get me a pot of water and he brought him a pot of water and the sage took a pinch of salt and dissolved it in that water and then said can you see this the salt now in this no father I can't see it then he said taste the water and see taste it on the surface how is it it is salty in the middle how is it is salty at the bottom how is it salty the salt has pervaded the water the self pure consciousness pervades your entire personality structure that is why your mind starts functioning that is why your intellect becomes brilliant you start understanding things it gets enlivened that is why your body appears to be some conscious entity and you immediately identify with all of these and you think this much only is me but you are essentially the clay functioning as the pot, please remember this, you are the water functioning as the wave or the bubble, you are the gold essentially functioning as an ornament temporarily. So the whole problem is our mind is so interested in the formations of consciousness it loses sight of the essential substance just like how logically he is trying to prove this to you actually you can experience this if you get into meditation what is the essential part of me when I say I what does it signify what do I mean by I you can turn back the mind to its source there's a technique to do that which we will discuss later on but you see by following this kind of a logical course what what do you come to? what is the conclusion he is trying to make? you are that essentially O Shweta Ketu he says you are that salt which has got dissolved in the water you are that essence of the got dissolved in the water you are that essence of the seed which manifests as the tree you are that lump of clay which manifests as pot or ladle or whatever you make out of it Tattvam asi Shweta Ketu this is the story this is if you learn to perceive yourself as this essential thing consciousness itself you will learn to perceive everything as another manifestation of that consciousness isn't as this essential thing consciousness itself you will learn to perceive everything as another manifestation of that consciousness isn't it it is again an appearance of that reality alone so then you learn to relate with others properly you learn to relate with the world in a mature way in a spiritual way otherwise how will you see others if I learn to look upon myself only as body I will see only as body, if I see myself only as confused thought I will see only as confused thought, only as mind, so learn to identify yourself with the essence of your being this is what he's saying Vivekananda bar bar ye kehte the, he used to say he has given many lectures on this in Gnan Yoga lectures you will find the real man and the apparent man, you have identified with the formations of consciousness, with the manifestations of consciousness so you think you are only the body and mind, you are essentially the Atman, pure consciousness functioning through this so learn in some way to identify yourself with this and your very world view will change Vivekananda used to say what is this world meant for many times we ask this question na, yeh sansar kyu hai, yeh creation kyu hai, he used to say it is a moral gymnasium to help you take exercise and become strong to help you go back to your source and see the reality of things as it is see just now you yourself told me the reality is clay appearing as pot the reality is brahman appearing as this world of diversity multiplicity if you analyze your own being you will see you are essentially awareness functioning through body and mind so also is everybody else you are that light shining in your eyes the light of awareness functioning through a body and mind or a both sundar an anecdote let me tell you here it is from the life of Raman Maharshi he was a saint a sage of Tamil Nadu, Tiruvannamalai. Once somebody asked him, somebody asked him, why is there this creation, this world? And he said, look, can your eyes see themselves? Can your eyes see themselves? Your eyes cannot see themselves? Can your eyes see themselves? Aapke aankhe khud ko dekh sakti hai? Nahi. Your eyes cannot see themselves. What do you require to see your eyes? A mirror. So that man said to Raman Maharshi, I require a mirror to see my eyes. Then Raman Maharshi said, creation is the mirror in which your eye sees itself. Catch this point. Creation is that mirror in which your eye sense sees itself reflected. This is the Vedantic concept which I am trying to give you. Others, last class we discussed what do others mean? It is I in another form functioning under another name. The same awareness is getting manifested through everyone under different guises because we identify the person only with his body and mind we don't see the simple truth. We see only the parts we don't see the clay. We don't see the essential water we see only the wave or the bubbles the foam we get caught up in that Samajh mein aa raha hai aapko? Yeh sansaar hi kya cheez hai? It is that mirror in which you can see yourself reflected if you see yourself reflected you will relate with others in a deeper way in a in a worshipful sense Vivekananda he hamesha kehte the world is there for you to worship and see worship God there because essentially it is awareness manifesting through different forms isn't it this is the actual reality of life so thoda soch ke dekho Advait Vedanta is telling you reality as it is when our confused mind comes into operation you will only see the formations of consciousness. You will see the manifestations of consciousness which are body and mind. So you identify people only with body and mind. You understand this is the mistake we make. This teaching is taking you to the heart of things the source of things to reality as it is yes very good see how this is the very first question which I put up in this class how will you think of a evil person if he is also a manifestation of consciousness how do you relate with him? You see, what is evil in him? It is his mind, his sanskars, his traits. It is, is it he himself? He himself is consciousness functioning through that instrumentation, that mind and body. So you see, it is his mind that is bad. It is his body that may be polluted his consciousness consciousness is not touched by all this that is why Gandhi ji kehte the hate sin not the sinner you must be able to separate the two only through this vedantic knowledge you will get this ability to separate the two so you will relate to a mischief maker and evil doer also in a very positive way what are you hitting in him the mind the mind is wrongly conditioned the mind has bad sanskars the mind is doing the evil the essential heart of the person is not his mind it is his awareness which is always a part of God it is God himself Brahman himself some of the animals let's say go to animals also their mere existence depends on the other animals and they eat if they don't if they don't want it they will not survive so how do they perceive this and their existence is made by the creator that way. See, that is why for an animal attacking a prey, he is not in search of higher reality. It is just survival instinct. You are in search of the higher reality. So you will understand this Vedantic concept. Us animal ko matter bhi nahi kar raha hai. From your standpoint what should be the perception of the world? You understand? This is what you should bother about because I'm telling you everything is a manifestation of consciousness but everything manifests that very consciousness very differently. An inanimate object will not manifest consciousness at all. So it appears inanimate to you. An animate object is going to manifest consciousness may be with certain qualities. So it appears like a good person or a bad person. Consciousness is present everywhere. How its manifestation comes about accordingly you are giving things their importance, their status, their importance to your life isn't it learn to see things from the Vedantic standpoint and you will relate to everything properly even to the predator you will relate to him kindly because you understand in his case the very equipment has not developed in order to understand consciousness he will only see prey as prey but if you see prey as prey that is a very un Vedantic or you have not understood the purpose of life you should be able to see the whole panorama of life from the standpoint of your reality which is Brahman consciousness you should be able to relate with others in a very mature way in an enlightened way you understand don't bother about what happens in the animal world kyunki unko equipment nahi hai is perception ke liye they have they don't have the brain and nervous system to understand any concept they don't have the ability to dive within themselves but you have that so if you see a predator may merely as a predator or a prey merely as prey you are only harming yourself see things as they are and understand everything is a manifestation of this truth then you know the great advantage of seeing things like this you will be able to accept even evil doers even criminals even people who are not whose minds are tainted, you will be able to in some way accept them, you will be able to work with those minds, you will be able to raise those minds if you develop this gnan drishti, this vision, otherwise you will isolate them. Good is one category, bad is another category. We live in the world of categories. This world of diversity, if you see the unity in that, what is the great advantage to you? This Upanishad itself will answer, tatra ko moha ka shoka ekatva manupasyate. If you see this oneness, you will not have any kind of shok, any kind of sorrow. Because you know even what is evil in this world is only a error in the mind of somebody the essential heart of that person is good the essential thing about that person is consciousness only so you will remove sorrow you will remove delusion moha for anything you understand if you develop this kind of a drishti isko man ke piche rakho this understanding and then work through an enlightened understanding of this concept this is what will help you because you will be living in a world where there are all sorts of things how do I relate with them you must be able to separate sin and sinner to relate positively with anything this separating sin of from sinner will only come to this Vedantic vision of the essential unity of all existence in consciousness but working through different bodies and minds which are differently conditioned with different sanskars with different attitudes you understand ye drishti man ke piche rakhni hai otherwise you will start hating and getting angry and getting devastated with little negative experiences of life samajh mein aaya? today we are going to learn mind management and yoga psychology how to handle that mind if you don't have a steady background behind it tell me the background is the self, this concept of Atman that is the unchanging background the real you is that the real him is that in that mind and body are appearing and doing all their various functions if you get this Drishti you can handle any mind you can handle anybody you can handle any mind, you can handle anybody, you can handle the world So this is what is being said here You understand? This is the view of the saints Let me just give you an example and then I will go into some of the practical aspects of this Yes, there is a question there Ma'am the question is that if somebody actually starts seeing the consciousness in an instrument and the instrument is mind and me free him of this instrument and may be that's how I will remove all the consciousness from all those instruments which are of wrong sanskars or which are making mistakes and let me remove that so how can we say that it is not right? Freeing some... No, you see, the thing is, if a wrongdoer does something wrong, I am not saying we justify that it is right, just by removing the consciousness portion. What I am telling you is, if you get the ability to see him as he is, his unchanging element, you will learn to correct that wrong in a very mature way. The wrongness is in his mind. It's a trait in his mind mature way the wrongness is in his mind it's a trait in his mind it's a sanskar in his mind where is it lodged it is a wrong trait in his mind the correction has to be applied to his mind not to his being not to he himself he himself is that very awareness manifesting through that body and mind correction has to be applied to his mind so up case a caro gave a correction you will do it without hate you will do it without anger that way that person improves if you handle a criminal as in a criminal way in a very strong way he cannot improve nor will it invoke compassion in you for that he has done Kab wo drishti aayegi? you see when this kind of a ability to change a person comes when you can change his awareness of himself and for that first you must be aware of his real nature his real nature is not bad, the essential nature of everybody is consciousness itself, his mind has gone bad, the change is to be made in the mind, so get this point firm and you can make the required change, you cannot change any person that way, are Otherwise you will react immediately of compassion only because I will feel that this is taken out of the mind and consciousness will be free See, this thing of getting free is not something you do physically or mentally You can only become free of body mind complex in a state of liberation in a state of very high yoga so ACG is making any kind of the or a portion retain kya ACG is nahi hai ye only if you have this background knowledge you will know how to change people's minds you get the power to do that without reacting negatively yourself otherwise two reactions are possible you succumb to the negativity or as she said you try to escape from it anyway the person is not actually bad so why should I give punishment these two ways you can adopt but this drishti will give you what it will give you the ability to change the person where he is going wrong Ability to change his mind How it will give you that you will see it Let me give you an illustration, an incident from Sri Ram Krishna's life You know, you have heard about Sri Ram Krishna ke baare mein aapne suna hai na, wo bahut baar samadhi mein rehte the. Constantly he would be in that state. So one day the author of the gospel of Shri Ram Krishna, he comes to Shri Ram Krishna's room in Dakshineshwar and wo dekhte hai ki Shri Ram Krishna samadhi mein hai. He is absorbed within. It appears like there is no life in the body it is appearing like that and he's radiating great bliss as if waves of bliss he is throwing out from his body and he there are tears rolling down his cheeks and the face is radiant with joy and love with an extreme kind of bliss toh wo dekhte rahe aise Thakur ko and then suddenly she after a long time Sri Ram Krishna came out of that state and he became conscious of his surroundings and you know the first sentence he said he said do you know how I see this world I see that this world is soaked in God soaked in Brahman it is Brahman manifesting as all this Brahman manifesting as these trees this garden these buildings these men and women it's all him even as something like he gives this example if everything is made up of wax there's a wax garden, the leaves are made of wax, the trees are made of wax, fruit is made of wax, people are made of wax, models of wax, buildings are made of wax how would it appear? It's appearing like that to me the wax is Brahman, pure consciousness itself, everything is as it were a picture of that an appearance in that, this is how he's seeing the whole world and that very Thakur Sri Ramakrishna when it came to somebody doing a mistake he would at once point out agar ye brahma drishti ho you will know how to correct a wrong and you will get the power to correct the wrong because essentially you can change a person when you change his awareness of himself. Agar aapke bhitar wo awareness aayi ho of who you are and who the other person is you will get the power to make the change. So you see this is what we have to develop because this knowledge is excluded from our curriculum from everything from our education system we are not able to find the essential unity of things we are in the world of diversity and multiplicity we only focus on the pot we don't focus on the clay is cabaret me how a co-eager much naive and we are searching for that unity everywhere you ask any sociologist any economist he will say yes equality is the thing, but where is there equality in this world of diversity? The equality lies in your essential nature in consciousness itself. So, you will energy to make clay out of water. Yes. What is the power, the driving force which makes Brahman a diversity? Yes, you see he is going into a very deep point. What is it that makes this manifestation possible? That is what he is asking. Now every philosophy will give you a different answer for this. Like for example, the Shakta philosophy will say yes, there is an energy which converts Brahman into this world of manifestation. But just now we were talking of Advaita Vedanta, Advaita Vedanta will tell you the world of manifestation is an appearance in Brahman, iska matlab kya hai the wave is too temporary it is just a manifestation of water, an appearance in water and it will go back to that water you understand it was an appearance of water alone no change actually took place so I can give you a number of answers for your question up job philosophy low whether you now you take this Shaktism example there is an energy which is called Shakti which converts Brahman into this world of manifestation or you take the Advaita Vedantic stand whatever it is the essential thing what you require is you must know at the heart of things there is unity you are seeing a world of diversity but in at its heart there is unity and if you take this standpoint you will handle that diversity properly. How this happened is a different thing, actually it has not happened. If you go to the very last step of philosophy, Advaita Vedanta, nothing has happened, it appears like that to you. If you ask somebody who cannot perceive color, color blind people, how this blue and green color happened, they will say it has not happened. somebody who can't perceive color, color blind people that how did this blue and green color happen? they will say it never happened it is a manifestation to your equipment electromagnetic radiation in visible range appears as color to you to your equipment it is that particular thing so also to your equipment just now with your level of development you are seeing yourself as body and mind Only consciousness is there Those who go to Samadhi, they see this only It is the same thing It is manifesting or appearing as all this So just now keep this concept behind your mind The vision of saints is the ultimate vision of reality From that vision you will find solutions to your everyday problems in life You see how we will draw solutions In your syllabus, the psychological perspectives we are supposed to study Psychological perspectives of happiness now psychological perspectives of happiness measurement of happiness how are you going to measure happiness we have not gone into samadhi and experience that state how will I know the levels of happiness in my mind? Can you give me some practical hints on how you can know? You see your PANAS scale that we are using, that is one of one scale for measuring your happiness. What is it trying to measure? PANAS scale? Have you seen in your assignment? What is written there? What does PANas mean? it is positive, negative, emotion, effect, effect is emotion schedule at what rate is your mind fluctuating into positive and negative moods that is what it is tracking when you do an act of service how long does your good mood prevail if you do a wrong act how long does your bad mood prevail? Now I will give you a very simple practical experiment here, it is so important for you to understand how this works. You see, what they did was, they gave their students in that university, two groups of students, they gave two students in that university, two groups of students, they gave two different jobs. For the first group, they said you have to go over a period of one week and help out poor children, do acts of kindness for others, at least one act per day and record the act and give us as we are telling you, record it and come and show us what you have done. So you have to come and submit that what you are doing. Acts of kindness towards others and to the second group they said this is a different group they said you have to do acts of kindness to yourself over the week which means go and enjoy yourself, go and indulge, movie me jao, k now go kushra ko over the period of one week and record your emotions and come and show it to us record this panaskal at the end of that one week they call they recorded the they brought the panas together and you know what they found whatever the first group had done as service to others it experienced emotion at a deeper level at a stabler level unke man mein koi erratic emotion nahi tha a long-lasting form of joy they experienced and the first group very erratic emotions suddenly pleasure sudden pain and sudden well frustration, boredom, depression they experience all of this so what does this experiment indicate when you go out and do something for others what is the definition of the other person you in another form so you satisfy your deeper level you will actually experience this long term happiness if you continuously do service activity you understand your mind is filled with a joy which you can't explain a peace that passeth all understanding this is that kind of peace it brings into your life you're happy for no reason you can make easy cook a he could she I this is the effect of good work I can give you an example from your own group you see I mean I could not answer now so when you go back to your rooms today you just type on your type into the website www.parivar.org parivar.org and you go and see what work Vinayak Lohani is doing. He was an alumnus of IIT Kanpur and IIM and he left a very lucrative career in order to only help destitute children, children who are not able not even able to afford education, the parents cannot afford it or they are deserted or may be orphaned children. Such children he has taken now more than 2000 children, he provides everything like a parent for them, collects funds for them and provides everything gives them the greatest tool for transformation which is education makes them stand on their own feet and then leaves them into this world he has 2000 children and the actual base is in Kolkata now it has expanded to Madhya Pradesh there also I think more than 1500 children are there look at the enormous one man one transformed mind now it has expanded to Madhya Pradesh, there also I think more than 1500 children are there look at the enormous one man, one transformed mind look at the effect, he is an IIT graduate young man, he comes to me here when he is in Delhi what I am telling you is, if you have because he sees them, how does he see them I have a family it is me in another form suffering like this, so if you get this vision your mind will be like this and you will get the ability to bring immense joy into your life, great happiness into your life so make this a part of your thinking this is not a theory, this is the real thing, see the people who have really found into your life so make this a part of your thinking see the people who have really found joy without objects you will see they have been givers whatever you have you can give not essentially just money or this or that this is a possibility with you it brings very high levels of joy and peace into your life. So this is one way of measuring happiness, another way is what WHO has created, what is called the quality of life scale, you might have heard of it, that is also a very practical scale which tracks the quality of your life. It is actually, you see how WHO defines a state of well-being you know it says a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely absence of disease. This is what is meant by happiness. A state of complete well-being it is a broad range concept actually and they are also tracking it subjectively which means to the perception of the actually and they are also tracking it subjectively which means to the perception of the individual and they have come at this particular model. Now I am going into quality of life model for examining or analyzing your happiness levels. Ye aap dekhiye is slide par, overall quality of life. Now look here what are the parameters which they use your first of all your physical health, your energy and fatigue levels, pain and discomfort, sleep and rest, then your psychological levels negative feelings, positive feelings, self-esteem, thinking, learning, memory and concentration, your level of independence, mobility activities of daily living, dependence on medicinal substances or medical aids, your work capacity, your social relations, personal relationships, social support all of this together determines your quality of life. There is more of it. You see your environment, financial resources, freedom, physical safety and security, health and social care, its accessibility and quality, home environment, opportunities for acquiring new information and skills, participation in an opportunities for recreation and leisure, physical environment which includes pollution, noise, traffic, climate, sub delhi me bahut zaruri hai ye sab determine karna, transport and spirituality, religion, personal beliefs, all of this also. So, you see all of these together constitute the quality of your life according to WHO. These are all valid parameters. In practical life, you require all of these in some measure. This will determine your level of life satisfaction and happiness according to UNESCO models . Then there is another kind of inventory which which is another scale for your happiness. You know it measures depression . When you are in depressive modes episodes this is a an inventory it is actually a 21 question questionnaire have a multiple choice questionnaire which the patient has to fill and according to this inventory you see earlier you know psychometric tests used to be done, but according to this inventory it is the subject who is giving his opinion. It is again becoming subjective all of these models you know finally they are coming to the subject this is the great transition now in this present age we are looking for subjective measures what does the patient have to say about himself after all your experience of happiness is where in yourself and you know best your states of mind how you feel within yourself is your experience of happiness. How you feel, suppose you are feeling bad about something, how you feel within yourself is the measure of your depression, isn't it? So you see all of them are taking some form of a subjective element, subjective understanding in measuring happiness levels. So this is called Beck depression inventory. It was invented by Aaron Beck. Today it is an important diagnostic tool to understand and measure depression. Our Upanishads also employ a tool. Aapko pata hai? Jaise abhi mene aapko teen tools diye. Pana scale is one which you are using then the WHO model is QOL quality of life which determines your levels of happiness and the third is what determines your level of sorrow this back depression inventory. Upanishad, Tai tearya Upanishad is also giving you a scale for happiness, dekhiye wo scale hai quite subjective just listen to it how you a scale for happiness. Dekhiye wo scale hai quite subjective. Just listen to it how they try to measure happiness. The unit for happiness is a young man, somebody like you who is very healthy, very happy, very expeditious, very capable and with well developed intelligence, well developed faculties who owns this earth with all its wealth this is one unit of human happiness they say so let's call this 1H now they will say they will say that this 1H if you multiply it a hundred times that is supposed to be the happiness of Gandharvas Gandharva kon hai aapko padha hai? Semi celestial beings but they will always add another point here a desireless mind if if the mind is desireless then this one unit of happiness multiplied by hundred times will give you the happiness level of the Gandharva that multiplied by 100 times will give you the happiness level of a Deva of a God that multiplied a hundred times will give you the happiness level of Virat or Hiranyagarbha that is the Sagun aspect of God Aise wo bolte jate hai everywhere they will add the line this in a desireless mind this in a desireless this in a desireless mind what are they pointing towards can you tell me they are pointing 1 lakh 0 what they are trying to tell you is no matter what objects you have around you, no matter what your capacities, if your mind is conditioned wrongly, if it has the wrong attitudes, if it has worries and anxieties, you will not be happy no matter what objects come into your life. If it is free of all this wrong conditioning of all compulsiveness if it is free of negativity if it is desireless it will produce happiness even if you don't have anything. Suppose you have just let's imagine suppose you have a billion dollar home huge house 25 rooms everything is there, 10 cars you have all sorts of things but if the family is not fine and family is fine but your mind is prejudiced biased, you are too anxious or you are too worried about different things, you are too angry a person, can you be happy with a 1 billion dollar home? Where does happiness lie? If your mind is in the right state you will be happy no matter where you are, how you are. To yahi point out karne ke liye wo aisa units create kar rah creating such units, think about this if you have everything yet your mind is not developed you cannot be happy if you don't have anything but you have very well developed mind which has a huge portion of awareness, awareness is dominating over thought process you will see it is always cheerful you require very little to make you happy in fact that is the definition of a Yuva you know in our culture Yuva kaun hota hai? his vital energy is functioning in such a way he is always bright and happy one whose vital energy is strong is always uske uske muk par ek muskan hoti hai, wohi yuva hai, the essential thing is intact what you want is right within you, if you know how to handle your system properly, you will always be happy, this is what they are all pointing out towards. Agar ye is cheez se gadbad karo, you do not know how to handle your body, you do not know how to handle your mind, you do not know how to handle your emotions, your thoughts, you do not know how to handle your other people, you will not be happy no matter what objects you bring into your life. This is the simple truth all of us have to know. You can understand it very clearly, isn't it? Afterwards you bring objects into your life, they will add to your happiness but if you invest everything only in the object without taking care of yourself, you will lose on happiness. This is what they are telling you. Now we will go into one very important thing which you need to know. In some measure everybody is suffering stress how happiness is practically removed from your life this is something you should know from this understand from the next few slides you see up a pass other sub cheese a ho you have a brilliant intellect but you are suffering from unnecessary anxiety disorders stress means actually this it is an it it is a high-level anxiety syndrome it is the greatest trigger of psychosomatic diseases today stress recently you know a four-year-old girl told me she has stress four-year-old which means I am suffering from stress, that is too much for her because there is stress, high level emotional stress. So, now what is what is the cause for this stress you tell me, it is inbuilt in your mind look at the symptoms of stress naturally it will give you pain here and there, it will give you insomnia, sleep problems, digestive problems, eating too much or too little, difficulty concentrating and making decision decisions. Is not this all this the symptom of stress fatigue at all levels. Now you see stress is nothing but it is something which happens in your mind, something which happens due to untrained thought and emotion when you are not able to direct your energies towards specific goals in life you will get caught up with the unnecessaries of life that builds up a stress in you many times the factor appears to be outside I am suffering emotional stress due to a particular person but actual factor is your response, your reaction to that person's attitude towards you. If your response reaction is positive, then even a very negative person will not cause stress in you, a very negative situation will not cause stress in you. How do you handle your equipment, a lot of your stress is decided by that this is a hard point to digest but at some point you will understand you cannot change outside people and the outside world just like that, you have to bear it and you can change yourself whenever you want. So you can change your stress levels. Are you understanding this? You can change it whenever you want by learning to handle your mind. Otherwise, you know, neurophysiology will give you a number of stressors, stress factors. You cannot change them just like that in your system. Like for example, neurophysiology is going to tell you adrenaline is responsible for your stress, hm control your levels of adrenaline. Look at these the information I have given you there. What does adrenaline do? You will just love it. You love adventures, is not it? That is an adrenaline shot in your blood and what does it do? It increases your heartbeat, your breathing rate, makes glucose absorption easier, contracts blood vessels. So, blood is directed to muscles, stimulates perspiration, it inhibits insulin production, but frequent adrenaline surges can also lead to damaged blood vessels, high blood pressure, hypertension, heart attack, stroke, headaches, anxieties, insomnia, weight gain. So, how do you handle your adrenaline? You handle your brain and its hormones through your mind, through your thoughts, through your attitudes, through your emotions, through your understanding. So take charge of yourself, neto you will be at the mercy of your adrenaline and extra surges will do will actually create more and more stress for you. Vaisahi the most important. The next is cortisol. This is also supposed to be a stress hormone which is responsible for very high levels of stress. Dekhi iske bhi in some measure it is useful to you, it raises the amount of glucose in your blood stream, it helps the brain use glucose more effectively, restraining functions that are non-essential to your life in a fearful situation, altering immune response, affecting parts of the brain that control fear motivation and mood. It helps in all this, but too too high levels will help will only lead to weight gain, high blood pressure, sleep problems, lack of energy, diabetes, osteoporosis, mental cloud cloudiness what is called brain fog and memory problems. Please see this ah a weakened immune system by which you are susceptible to infections. So, you see this what at the most third person perspective what can it tell you? It can tell you how your hormones are functioning, how your brain is functioning, how your central nervous system is functioning through that what is the lesson you have to learn? Congenerate cortisol yesterday I told gave you a very important point your anxiety syndrome generates more and more cortisol in your blood anxiety in your mind if you control those levels you will naturally control this how else will you control stress? Samajh mein aa raha hai main kya bolne ki koshish kar rahi hoon. Your happiness is in your hands, your unhappiness also is in your hands. Aap theek kar lo aap kaunsa choose karoge. Okay, so understand that you can make the changes you want to make. Why I am giving you the neurophysiological aspect is you must understand what is happening in your body as a result of your wrong thoughts or compulsive thinking or whatever ye cheez ho rahi hai, this is leading this is leading to my stress levels even if you don't have a valid cause you can be very stressful you know this is a big problem why mind is not trained erratic thinking unlawful thoughts greed too much of hoarding tendency all this will naturally result in stress and kind thoughts empathy kind feelings towards other service activities will naturally remove stress from your mind they get cheese kitty simple hair but you must know how to apply it properly to yourself. That is why all this is important. The different sciences are giving you a third person picture of yourself. Now make the changes through the first person. Now here there is a very important question, you see macroeconomic models are studying this. What is the question? Do you agree that subjective well-being measures or at least some of the sub indices from the typical survey measures are now reliable enough to give useful insights when used in macroeconomic empirical analysis. Here you need to know what is macroeconomic empirical analysis. Here you need to know what is macroeconomic empirical analysis. You see if I have to understand how to produce collective happiness, I need a macro happiness model is not it. Together as a society how do we increase our happiness levels, what are the parameters we are going to measure and what are how are we going to make it happen. For that, what is the type of research that is required? Is it subjective research or objective research? This is what the question is asking. Are subjective well-being measures important in determining macroeconomic models? And you see the greatest bar is for agreement. Today people all over the world are convinced that happiness is a subjective matter. So I have to take a subjective well-being stand, I have to understand my subjective well-being first in order to frame a macroeconomic policy for macro happiness levels. Samajh mein aaya hai aapko? for macro happiness levels. So much may I have go? There is greater agreement than disagreement, which means we are understanding the importance of the subject, subjectivity in our everyday experience. Look at the next slide. Yes? There were two things. Strongly agree, strongly disagree, and disagree. So if we add both the parts, do both people disagree? No. No, you see here, how do I go back, you see agreement is greater than disagreement, neither agree nor disagree is lower. Strongly disagree. Strongly disagree. They are very few in number. But agree and disagree. What I mean to say is this is just a general census taken. What I mean to say is we are understanding the importance of subjectivity. Is it a fact that happiness is a subjective matter or not? Is it or not? Tell me. Is it or not? Is it a subjective experience or is it an objective experience? It is a subjective experience. So this is what the general agreement is coming towards this. Differences will be there. Okay. In everything there will be differences. Now, you see the second question is do you agree that quantitative well being analysis which means only objective way should play an important part in guiding policy makers in determine macroeconomic policies, which means macro happiness only through quantitative objective measures. Should we agree upon this or not? Here you see the disagreement is greatest, which means again it is a it is a good sign is not it, which means again we are believing in subjectivity. We are understanding that it is important to understand subjective experiences in order to develop macro happiness models and determine our macroeconomic policies in order to develop macro happiness models and determine our macroeconomic policies in order to make them practical make happiness a reality collectively in our society this is what these models are teaching you now here jab hum let me make one very important point jab hum bolte hain where desirelessness leads to happiness is the Upanishad the Vedas trying to tell you is it advocating mendicancy or trying to tell you phir koi cheez mat aap pursue karo aise baat kar rahe hain kya not at all you know the picture of welfare state in the Vedic paradigm is a picture of plenty in fact the Rishi will urge his brahmacharis all his people that go out and seek the greatest wealth go out and build up your society this is what this is the purpose of this knowledge he tells them he sends them out with a developmental drive put into them, how is this possible? You tell me actually speaking you know what what is it that drives economy, consumerism drives economy is not it? Consumerism, what is consumerism? Converting you into a consumer, now desirelessness is against consumer consumer obviously, is not it. So, how do you correlate the two? Now, you see the definition of consumerism let me give you here. This is an important point for you to note. Consumerism is the doctrine that ever increasing consumption of goods and services forms the basis of a sound economy, ok. Now Now economical growth what does it depend upon? It of course, depends upon an expansive infrastructure and global markets and huge investments, but most of all it depends upon human resource, human personnel if they are not trained. Even if you create great wealth, do you think it will be circulated properly it will be distributed properly it will be utilized properly now what is training this human resource is spiritual knowledge it is making the human resource uncorrupt because it is analyzing the inner levels of happiness if you have a corrupt state of mind you cannot be happy no matter how much money you have so actually this spiritual world view is changing the subject from within. It will get you better human resource so as to be able to utilize your wealth in the proper fashion. It is actually augmenting the developmental drive. Aapki samajh mein ye aara hai by preventing civilizations from becoming merely hedonistic or material agar if you do not have trained developed human resource it will only lead to exploitation at every level corruption at every level how will you utilize the wealth you have created properly so understand this Upanishad this the spiritual world view it will train our human resource to become better and better men of real character, real capacity and that that way it will help in the utilization of wealth best so it augments the developmental drive it doesn't detail or derail the developmental drive please see this in fact the models of Rishis in our culture you know they were Rajarishis, Janak Rajarishi the Vishwamitra Rajarishi they were kings but with rishi mind this is the model being given to you, you must be a king be a owner of everything but with perfect control over yourself then only you can even enjoy that wealth you can give that wealth to others, you can utilize that wealth properly, otherwise you cannot even enjoy what you earn. So this viewpoint, spiritual viewpoint will actually augment the developmental drive and a mere exploitation of resources leads to collapse of society and macroeconomic models. You know there is a book called Collapse by Jared Diamond where he identifies the causes for the collapse of societies. One of the reasons is this, too much of materialism, too much of hedonism without a spiritual viewpoint will actually the society simply falls. It has become animal like, it has become animal like it has become effeminate so understand what spiritual knowledge you get will only help you understand and live your life better it doesn't take you away from life it helps you live life at a deeper level yes how this knowledge is going to help you? Now we will go into the very important part. This and next class you will be studying mind management. We discussed psychological aspects, neurophysiological aspects and economic aspects of happiness. Now we will go into understanding mind if you have understood happiness is a state of your mind you must know what mind is there are two classifications of mind structural and functional classification we will go into both you see you mind is the instrument in Sanskrit man ko kehte hai antahkaran it is called antahkaran the inner instrument it is an instrument given to you you who are pure consciousness the instrument of mind has been given to you to function in this world aap kaise usko handle karte ho ye cheeze hai so you see in the structural classification the mind is divided into a conscious, subconscious and unconscious portion. Conscious mind is only a strip on the surface of your mind, that mind through which you are thinking just now. You are conscious of your thoughts, you are conscious of your emotions, your ideas, everything popping you are conscious of it. It is only a bit of your emotions, your ideas, everything popping you are conscious of it, it is only a bit of your mind, subconscious portion vast hai, aapke conscious thoughts jab when you repeat them they go into your subconscious and become sanskars, impressions and memories, is not it, we discussed that, so that is lodged in your subconscious. So usually when you are thinking many times it is only your memory coming back into the conscious plane. Is not it? You think through memory and you think through exposures what your senses are being exposed to. So, the subconscious mind is a big part of you, your mind and then there is an unconscious portion which you know nothing about. So, this is the structural classification of mind. Unconscious mind is those impressions which you have forgotten completely. For example, past life experiences or your very babyhood experiences, do you remember? I don't remember anything. You were a baby at one time and you did a lot There is no such great demarcation because subconscious goes into the unconscious But that part of your memory which you have totally forgotten Which can only be extracted through psychotherapy, that is the unconscious portion. It is like a dark chamber for you just now. But subconscious mind you can work with, it comes in your dream. What you have suppressed in conscious mind many times it comes in the subconscious in your dreams. So, subconscious mind you are acquainted with, but unconscious you do not know about. Now this is structural classification. in the functional classification of mind how your mind functions there are four items in functional classification oneras manas kya cheez hai? your cogitating mind which is considering the pros and cons of everything just now hmm the thinking mind sankalpa vikalpa atmika antah karna vritti manas this is the definition of manas jo sankalpa karta hai vikalikalp karta hai, constantly thinking about this is right or that is right or cogitating that is manas, that is called manas. The buddhi also is part of your mind, part of your antahkaran, what is the definition of buddhi? Intellect, intellect, determinative faculty, it thinks and determines, makes decisions, determines something in finality, so it is actually called nishchayatmika antahkarna vritti jo nishchay karta hai kuch, so that part of your mind is called buddhi, then what is chittam? it is your memory bank, anusandhanatmika antahkarna vritti, that part of your mind which is a the thoughts reproduced from your memory a large part of your thinking is memory based please see this so chittam is an important very major portion of your mind and then ahankar is yes sense of identity I sense aham atmikantakarana vritti this is the functional classification of your mind. So, when you say mind it includes all of this mind is antahkaran inner instrument it has these four faculties through this you function please see how valid this entire thing is. Now, we will analyze the content of your mind what is the content of your mind thoughts isn't it we will analyze a thought anatomy of a thought I have created a slide on that you see here this is the anatomy of a thought you should know what is happening in your mind you see a thought whenever you think something two things happen one is there is a particular modification of your mind, your antahkaran, the mind stuff. The inner instrument modifies slightly and your thought can be either thought due to an exposure of your senses or a replaying of your memory. To ek thought mein teen portions hote hain. First is an idea, usually invested with an emotion and vital energy has been invested into that thought. Pranayik energy is present, that is why that thought means something to you. Ab agar idea portions zyada hoyo thought mein, toh it is a rational thought. If the emotion portion is more emotional aspect is more it is called an emotion the thought itself is called an emotion and vital energy is common. Samajh mein aara hai main jo bol rahi hoon nobody will give you the anatomy of your one single thought only yog sutras will give you this but understand this how you are thinking jab ye thought aapke mann mein introduce hota hai your mind undergoes a modification that is the first picture there you see that's the modification the vritti in your mind samajh mein aaya? you cannot ignore this vritti because any impression you take in any thought you think is slightly modifying your mind when you practice meditation then only you can track this modification and the nature of the thought that is why meditation is the art of stabilizing both this modification of mind and the thought. What is meditation? Unless you go into a meditative state you will not know what is happening in your mind. It is not even under my conscious control. Tell me, are you thinking or is thinking happening? Tell me what is the truth? Don't give me the ideal answer. Tell me what is the truth don't give me the ideal answer tell me what is happening just are you thinking or is thinking happening thinking is happening now if thinking is happening you are that means you are not in conscious control you are not in charge, with this kind of mind you cannot gain success anywhere. If you are thinking the thoughts you want to think, if you are guiding your will to absorb the knowledge you want, if you are able to direct your emotions to certain specific in certain specific ways, then you will be successful anywhere. If thinking is just happening, emotion is simply bubbling up my exposures decide what are what will be the content of my mind then you are not in charge of your mind you are a compulsive person who will only suffer frustration because you are not in charge of anything you will not get be successful anywhere so understand where what is the value of a thought what is getting modified there and how meditation will help you reverse this situation it will give you charge of your entire mind every thought up up up may say both sorry look minutes when I counseling major to counseling major Nikki our ship the cube party I am not in charge of myself, I don't know what is happening, somebody has to give me some advice, somebody has to give me a remedy and then maybe I will change myself somehow, so why do you reduce yourself to this state, what right have you to do this, your parents have invested their whole life in you and this is the return you are giving Why should you go into a state where you are not in control of yourself Meditation will help you reverse this situation Understand the importance of this I am only giving you what will be important to you throughout your life If your mind is not in your hands, your life is not in your hands If you are not in charge of your thoughts, you are not in charge of your life It will just go by you One day you will ask, what happened, you have grown so old You will grow old before you grow up Isn't it? So take charge This is the intention of this course Isn't it? So take charge. Is course ka yahi intention hai. Yes. I heard somewhere like a destiny is predefined, so we cannot control it through our thoughts or through our work or something, so can you relate those things? You see, destiny is predetermined is wrong thinking Take it from me If you say destiny is predetermined I cannot make any changes What is it that you are giving in to A force outside of you which you are not in control of You can change your ways, your mind Through that you can change your experience of life jab going some bolte have there is nothing called free will they are talking from a totally different standpoint from your standpoint you have the will to make the essential changes in your life obviously a corrupt surrender car though some other power has to come and help me, that power will not come and help you until you have exercised your effort. Ek Ram Krishna Parama hums keh sakte hai, ki yes, let mother's will be done, I have no will of my own. Kyuki unki sthiti waha thi when he was completely under the divine will. You are functioning as an individual with a small will of your own if you exercise it in the right direction that divine will help you Naito wo help bhi nahi karenge Bhagwan help, God helps those who help themselves first that's the first step I will make the changes in my life if a child doesn't want to make a change, do you think the mother will make the change for the child? Can she do it? To bhagwan ishwar aise hi hai, wo hamari mata ke jaise hai. If the mother sees the child struggling to make a change, she will help it. So don't take this kind of an attitude, it is all predetermined, predestined, main kuch nahi kar sakta, this this kind of an attitude is the attitude of lazy people who don't want to change, ye door kar do apne maas, you are a you are young people you should stand up and say I will create my life, vivek and ye hi chaate the, I can go into a huge discussion on free will, much change can we do? But I don't want to do that for you Because at this stage of your life You should say I will make the changes in my life And if I am not able to make this change I will appeal to a higher power to help me But I will not surrender and keep quiet and say I cannot do anything This is the sign of laziness Tamas, get out of this mode Isre aisi baat mat kahi hai ki main kuch nahi kar sakta, you are the creator of your own destiny Vivekananda kehte the, you are both the rock and the sculptor you can change your image by yourself you are the hammer you are holding and you are the rock and you are the sculptor. Make the essential changes in your life through your will, through your capacity, you are perfectly capable of it and you will see divine grace will come to lift you even further. You do not build up your own life by yourself consciously you don't take these things into your hands nothing will help you you see the way to make a change is this this is a model given to you to make the essential changes in your life by being able to handle your own mind there's a whole process given to you to make the essential changes in your life by being able to handle your own mind there's a whole process given to you Ashtang Yoga is this only, how to bring your mind in control, how to take your life into your hands You see the steps of this, Yam, Niyam, Asana, Pranayam, Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi There are 8 steps, that's why it is called as Ashtang Yoga The first two steps in a brief way I have covered Yam and Niyam, don't ignore them Yam and Niyam is the foundation of the rest If you ignore them, you won't get anything else What is Yam and Niyam? It is basic restraints and observances Like Ahimsa, you know what ahimsa is? Non-violence, satya, speaking the truth, asteya, non-stealing, non-holding, yesabataya, brahmacharya, directing your energies upward so that they lift your awareness to a higher level. aparigraha which means again non stealing, shoucha a kind of purity of body and mind which will keep you always fresh and then santosha contentment, tapas some amount of austerity, after that is swadhyay self-study and then is ishwar pranidhan self-surrender to God to the higher reality, devotion to God so all these restraints and observances will put your mind into a mode where it is capable of change you see then after that it starts asan pranayam all this start but without these basic moral observances your mind will not be ready for the change required. So today we will stop with yam and niyam. Next week may hum le jayenge isko further. This is a kind of code given to you to make the essential changes in your life you will be learning meditation in a deep way how to handle the deeper vrittis, how to handle your subconscious mind, how to handle your emotional insecurities, you will be learning all of that in the next classes to come but never say I am not in charge I cannot do anything about it. The scheme will be given to you apply it in your life. So we will proceed with this in the classes to come. Let us sum up with today's is other any questions? Today you learnt how to identify yourself correctly, what to identify with and how to look upon yourself and so how to look upon others. Then you learnt important things about your mind, how to measure happiness, the different scales available to us, yes and the different units of happiness available to us yes and the different units of happiness available to us you saw how the world is thinking about subjective levels of happiness and well-being what the macro economic policies are thinking about and how it depends upon not just quantitative analysis but qualitative analysis. Then you saw how the Vedic paradigm is giving you, actually giving you a very enlightened developmental drive, not taking you away from development, actually reinstating the developmental drive in you by learning to handle yourself and utilize the resources you create properly. And then we came to how to handle the essential aspect of you through which you are working, your mind. This is a summary of what we discussed today. how to handle the essential aspect of you through which you are working your mind. This is a summary of what we discussed today.
