 So, good afternoon everyone. Good afternoon, Mike. So, good afternoon everyone. So, this is a course on Inner Development, BV 731, Introduction to Science of Happiness by Parrajika Divyan and Pranaji. We are quite fortunate to have her. She is a monastic member of Ramakrishna Sharda Mission and principal of Divyadhita Vidya Mandir that runs here, the HOSCAS very close and she is the editor of Sunbeck Magazine. Before we begin just a few logistics, so we have you know course TAs, Ms. Meenakshi Batra who is sitting right here. So the course will have some assignments and you know she will be the contact person. I am here, I sit in SIT building just in case you know if any other questions feel free to contact me. And you know we sort of floated this course plan but thing to note here is that the word tentative right. It is a tentative course plan, we will try to follow this plan as much as possible. This is not in order. These order of these lectures may be you know in different order but depending upon how much we make progress, we will be able to cover the topics. And this is a pass only course. The only grade you can get in this course is NP which is audit pass grade, right. In the past, we offered some courses and some students got back to me saying that they want a NF grade. They did not attend any classes, they still wanted a NF grade. So that is very strange. But it is a pass only case. Those people who qualify, they complete the requirements, they get a NP. And the passing criteria is you have to attend 80% of the classes, 80% of the lectures have to be attended. And there will be assignments, there will be three assignments. And there will be a NF grade. And the NF grade is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the NF grade which is the classes, 80% of the lectures have to be attended and there will be assignments, there will be 3 assignments and assignment 1 is 30 marks, assignment 2 is 30 marks, assignment 3 is 40 marks and you will have to get 80% of the marks in assignment. It is not difficult to get but you just have to do it sincerely, that is all. Any other questions? So, without much further ado, we will talk about assignments towards the end, but I will hand over the podium to Divan and Parmej. Sir, when I have to give the PPT, I will just call you. Yeah. Sir. Yes. Sir, like in our curriculum we are allowed to audit only two courses. So, will this be counted as one of them? This is one credit course. So, if you have not, you know there are certain number of credits you can do in audit, right. So, you go better check with the UG and PG sections. If you qualify, then yes it can be counted, but they are the final decision makers for the final decision. So, if you have not, you know there are certain number of credits you can do in audit, right. So, you go better check with the UG and PG sections. If you qualify, then yes it can be counted, but they are the final decision makers for the final decision. So, if you have not, you know there are certain number of credits you can do in audit, right. So, if you have not, you know there are certain number of credits you can do in audit, right. So, if you have not, you know there are certain number of credits you can do in audit, right. So, if you have not, you know there are certain number of credits you can do in audit, right. So, if you have not, you know there are certain number of credits you can do in audit, right. So, if you have not, you know there are certain number of credits you can do in audit, right. So, if you have not, you know there are PG sections. If you qualify then yes, it can be counted but they are the final decision makers on this, right. So, this does qualify to be as a suitable audit in audit category, yes. And is it also that if you do not want to audit, so we can get a pass and fail this as a result? No, no, no. It has to be NP. Only audit. Only audit because this is not a non-graded unit. This is a graded unit. This is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is a graded unit. So, this is not a non-grading, this is a graded unit, this is a part of the graded curriculum. By the assignment we cannot get A, A- through this, only NP is the option. Yeah, we thought about it right now, this is the first offering of this course, we will see how it goes, therefore we have made it only pass and fail, maybe future offerings we can do A, B, C, D have made it only pass and fail. May be future offerings we can do A, B, C, D as well because there are assignments and all of that. But since this is the first time, we just want to keep it simple. That is why I just passed it. Rahulji, I can do a small Vedic chant before starting. I will circulate the attendance. These are sorted according to your entry numbers. So, please mark your attendance and pass it along. Any other questions on logistics? Excuse me sir. Yes. Sir, but we can, is it better to not register for the course but attend it? That is fine, yes. If you want to just learn, you can attend it. But then the thing is if you want to do assignments, then it is a bit, yeah, you have to because we cannot reach out to you, right. We will send emails, you have to send us a message, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message. So, you have to send us a message thing is if you want to do assignments, then it is a bit yeah, you have to because we cannot reach out to you right, you will send emails, if you are not registered then you cannot send emails. Sir. Yes. Sir, if we have not registered already. still go to the linear register, but after today we will not do any more registration, but please if you plan to do what to appear it in your bread sheet please register today. So, this is the one credit, but it is only audit, only in the audit category, but you check with the usual P T section, just verify with the once, because they might have some Any other question? Okay, so welcome and enjoy. Thank you. We'll start with a Vedic prayer. Om Sahana Babatu Sahanao Bhunattu Sahaveeryam Gharavavahe Tejasvinavadhi Tamastumavidvishavahe Om Shanti Shanti Shanti Om Asatoma Sadgamaya Tamasoma Jyotirgamaya Mrityorma Amritam Gamaya Om Shanti Shanti Shanti Welcome to this course on Science of happiness according to yoga and Vedanta. I think the topic is something very interesting to all of you and that's why so many have registered. Every lecture we will be discussing a lot of ideas on this topic. So I prefer that you don't skip lectures and I heard that in courses like this offered by IIT, the number tapers towards the end, that should not happen in this course, because the subject matter is something most interesting to you, isn't it? The science of happiness. So, every lecture you will get a huge chunk of knowledge, try to make the most of it you see happiness is something we value above everything else isn't it we give it number one value knowledge is for happiness whatever you earn is for your happiness whatever relationships you make it's for your happiness your success is for your happiness so since you value it above everything, you must make sure it remains your priority, you must make sure that you know everything about it, as much as is possible to know and that is why we thought of giving you this course on the science of happiness, many times what happens is there is a lack of clarity in understanding happiness and that is why you invest your time and energy in things which will actually not produce long term happiness for you. So with this course this kind of a clarity should come, what is happiness, it should not be an abstract idea you know, if it is an abstract hazy idea then you will devalue it, you will devalue happiness. So we will clear many of our concepts we will study happiness from different angles we will study the different levels of happiness available to the human experience and we will also see how happiness matters how happiness can be studied philosophically psychologically neurologically and spiritually through yoga and Vedanta so this is how we will be studying most of all it is the science of happiness let us remember we are not going to reduce happiness to being a artifact of some belief system or some meditation tradition no we are not going to study it like that we are going to study it as a science what is a science anywhere you do it, it will work, anybody does it, it will work and anytime it will work, that is a science. So you see there's a huge challenge when it comes to subjective experiences like happiness, how are you going to study it as a science? So for this you know what the problem is, subjective experiences are always in the first person and the objectivity science is defined by its methodology, the scientific method and there you use the objectivity criteria. So this is the huge challenge before us, only there are ways of doing this. Like for example, today there is a novel method in neuroscience, you combine the first person and third person accounts, it is possible to do that, it is technically called neurophenomenology. If you can do that, you combine the first person and third person methods and try to produce a way of understanding and analyzing and measuring happiness. Let me give you a simple example here. What first person and third person indicates. Suppose you tell me I'm hungry. And I say, well, what is the proof that you are hungry? Now you see, the fact of your hunger is a first person experience for you. But for me to find out that you're genuinely hungry, I need a third person account. Isn't it a third person measuring device so maybe I get a CT scanner or an endoscope and make sure take a scan your stomach and make sure there's no food there and then I declare that yes you are truly hungry so this is a third person method now the thing is for for us to understand first person did you understand clearly what first person and third person method. Now the thing is for us to understand first person, did you understand clearly what first person and third person method means because I will keep using the words but if you are not clear about what I'm trying to say you won't grasp the idea. Your entire experience of happiness is in first person, please see this but we are trying to study it and measure it and analyze it in the third person. So this is the challenge in front of us. It's something like let me give you another example here. I will be giving you lots of examples so that you properly understand the concepts. Suppose there's a scientist and he knows everything about electromagnetic radiation. He knows everything about the especially the visible light range he is a double PhD on it he knows everything about how the brain synthesizes knowledge how the brain understands electromagnetic radiation how it perceives color out of the visible light range but he is a blind scientist he has never known color hmm he doesn't know what the the glory of green or the beauty of blue but he knows everything about electromagnetic radiation now does this make any sense you tell me what I'm trying to point out to you is happiness is always a subjective first-person experience you are always going to experience it like that and that is why you chase it because it is something that happens in your system it is something that you experience in the first person always with your awareness invested in it and that is why as a third-person study it is alright but the experience will always be in the first person and that is why the first person is so important the subject becomes so important in the study of an experience like this and that is why we will be going into something of yoga and Vedanta also and how refining your instrument of perception, refining your mind which is actually intuiting happiness all this will help you understand and experience happiness better and better the higher levels of happiness so this is the kind of combination technique which we are going to use. Today many things, many of the hypothesis regarding cognition, regarding mentation, pre-mentation especially and the making of the will, the creation of willpower, free will, understanding free will and also some things like volition, all these are studied using this neuro-phenomenological method which is combining first person and third person methodologies in order to understand experiences. Now one more thing which I would like to point out here is scientists have seen that if the subject is a person of meditation, a person whose mind is very steady and given to meditative practices he is able to report subjective experiences better. If the mind is steady you will be able to understand your own subjective experiences better and then we can use this kind of a methodology even better combining the first person and third person. So this is one basic requirement. You see to understand any science, even an objective science, a certain steadiness of the mind is required. So here also in understanding our method, you should pay attention to whatever we are saying, otherwise you will miss some of the key points. And in this science, as I told you, we are not going to study it through some kind of a philosophy, we are going to study it as a science, so we better be clear about every point I make, we are keeping the whole thing interactive, you must be knowing that, you can stop me at any point and ask a question on what I am saying, but make sure you ask the right question, think and ask because I have a syllabus to complete okay yes yes yes you see meditation means thought when your mind breaks up into thoughts that is meditation pre-meditation is before it breaks up into thoughts what is its state what is the state of that mind now how will you study this to study a like this, it is required that you combine first person and third person, which means a meditative mind, the kind of subjective experience it will give out, it actually correlates or you can say tallies. There's an impressive correspondence between this kind of a first person experience and a third person EEG data which you can record through fMRI scans. You understand? So this kind of correspondence can be made and this is what this neurophenomenological method is about. So you see states like this prementation as he said, volition, free will, the ability to study this, it is possible through this method, this is the new scientific method, there will be a whole class on this, so don't worry, this is just an introductory class today. Now let me go into the definition of happiness, we all have our own definitions but in general happiness is defined as, it's not just a feel-good experience, it's something to do with your cognition, it's a cognitive experience, it's a state of your mind, it's not just a sensory experience, senses may act as inroads, but it is basically a cognitive experience, it's a state of your mind, it's a state where your mind actually feels well-being, that's the definition of happiness, well-being and it's called positive effect which means a good mood of gladness prevails in your mind and it's a fulfilling experience, isn't it? This is the definition of happiness you can say, but one some now let me give you some pointers on this definition, there are certain things you know about happiness which you are you have experienced it but you are you have not looked at it deeply so I would just like to make those few pointers regarding happiness one thing is each one of us understands happiness a little differently according to the quality of our minds does this make sense to you you know there's something called Satvic happiness Rajasic happiness and Tamasic happiness so what what does this mean to say you see some people get happiness by making others happy some people get happiness by making others sad some people get happiness by sharing with others some people get happiness by borrowing from others some people get happiness by giving it to others freely and some people get it by squeezing it out of others same happiness which means what for each person according to the quality of your mind you experience happiness differently so mind management becomes important in understanding happiness studying mind becomes important because finally my happiness is the interpretation of my mind I told you it's not a mere sensory experience it's a cognitive experience as a state of your mind so the kind of mind the kind of sanskars you have is going to a large extent decide your experiences of happiness and that is why we will also be studying mind management techniques in this course. Another thing which I would like to point out here have, I don't know if you have heard the term hedonic treadmill, have you heard? Any of you? No? Google me, you will get a lot of information, experimental information on that. It is important for you to understand this concept because how do you experience happiness? It is important for you to know that you know it's like this you whenever you are asking for happiness what happens is in your mind first of all there's a craving created for some particular object right? there can be many objects in your mind like for example let's take an example and study it. How many of you are from Delhi proper? Oh, very few. Everybody else is from other states and is it like that? Oh, okay. So anyway, I just wanted to take the example of Delhi ka laddu. Delhi ke laddu ke baare mein bolte hain, aap khaoge toh bhi pashta hoge, nahi khaoge toh bhi pashta hoge. Hain na? Bolte hain ye. Kyuki it's like this. If you eat it also, you suffer. If you don't eat it Isn't it? Because it's like this If you eat it also you suffer If you don't eat it also you suffer Because of the craving in our mind To enjoy something That craving is Dilika laddu is a substance Which can give you both experiences It can give you some level of satisfaction It can also give you some level of dissatisfaction Now what happens is Whenever you feel craving for something, let us analyze your own state of mind, what happens is first of all your mind will start reporting happiness due to that object, it will start reporting to you that if you have that you will have certain amount of happiness, now the report which it gives you is an exaggerated report. Just listen to me, later on you can contradict me if you wish, but it's an exaggerated report given to you initially and so your expectation increases very much. A report is given to you by your own mind and also an exaggerated kind of report is given to you due to which your expectation increases enormously when you actually experience the object you have eaten one or two or three laddoos of Delhi, what happens as a result immediately you see your mind maybe just goes quiet down a little and then jumps to the next object of craving it doesn't remain absorbed in the dilli kala do, it jumps to the next object of craving just see this is your state of mind or not all the excitement was in the expectation of getting great happiness all the excitement was in the report which the mind gave you before you had the experience so this is called the hedonic treadmill This is the normal state of our mind before we have an experience Do you understand why it is called hedonic treadmill? Because hedonism is pleasure theory And treadmill is, you know what treadmill is? Going in circle, doing one thing repeatedly So it's an exercise your mind gives you whenever you try to experience objects it will report a certain level of happiness and it will make you expect it after you experience the object immediately it goes to the next object of your craving it will not even stay for a moment to and get absorbed in that it doesn't all sensory experiences remember they are transient they are't all sensory experiences remember they are transient, they are ephemeral, they are not long-lasting and this is the kind of treadmill you follow as a result so once you understand this you will understand the nature of the experience of happiness at the sensory level and that is why we will tell you that happiness has different levels you see this is the next point I want to make one point is the experience at the sensory level it is the hedonic treadmill experience it's common to everyone all of us that is why in the human experience there are levels of happiness there are various levels of happiness if you try to maximize happiness only at one level you get into sorrow you get into dissatisfaction if you move to the next higher level of happiness you understand that there are levels of happiness available to you you see there is one level sensory level all the good things of life which come through your senses that is one level then there is the happiness born of thought isn't it you do some wonderful mathematics and you get so much of happiness out of it. You write a beautiful poem, you get so much of happiness. So that's the next level of happiness. Then there is intellectual level happiness, happiness in abstract concepts, happiness in creativity, high level creativity. So this gives you more and more happiness. Deep concentration at these levels gives you, puts you into the state of flow actually, gives you enormous amount of happiness and then there is a there are levels higher than that, you see effective experiences like service, the joy of service, the joy of bringing happiness to others, there is a higher level, a different quality of happiness and then there is the happiness of meditation available to you, still higher level of happiness, the happiness of absorption into something very great something very elevating so this all of this you have felt in some measure so you see in the human experience we have different levels of happiness when does sorrow come into our life when we try to maximize happiness only at one level we refuse to climb this Ladder, it's a vertical ladder, the different levels of happiness, we will discuss it in detail But just now you must know some basic facts about how your own mind works, the Tendency of our mind is because the mind is by nature restless, it will try to Maximize at one level and you get into the hedonic treadmill, you understand, understand if this is true or not apply to yourself and see, so this is how we will be studying the science of happiness, you know there is something called in economy called diminishing marginal returns, isn't it, so something like that applies even in happiness when you start earning you will understand this concept better the investment you put into something after a certain set point it will not give you the same result which it initially gave you happiness also is like that if you keep it at one level only you will only get diminishing return you know over indulgence at the sensory level what does it bring you? it bring it dulls your senses it dulls your mind it gives you repulsion for the object after sometime so your entire investment should not be only at one level that's the whole thing and that is why we will be studying this ladder of happiness in a big way, yes, yes the way to get out of it is understand that this level of happiness is not the final level available to me there are higher levels of happiness available to me so consciously you have to do it, you understand otherwise you know any amount of activity on that level is not going to increase your return yes yes so that's why we will be studying this extensively Yog Vedanta mein happiness kya cheez hoti hai, how saints and sages you would have seen they are able to stay absorbed in a state for long periods of time and exude a lot of radiance and happiness how is it possible you will study it, I am just giving you an introduction to what we are going to study, how we are going to study, scientifically we are going to study the whole thing, that's why I'm telling you don't skip classes every class you will lose a chunk of knowledge if you skip so this is one thing yes he has asked the right question kaise sambhav hai? higher levels of happiness kaise sambhav hai? we will go to that understand basically happiness is a state of your mind So it is the spin off of a good mind Isn't it? Basically You must understand this It is a spin off of a good life If you have a good mind and a good life You can be sure there will be a gladness Prevailing in your mind And it doesn't happen just by knowledge It doesn't happen just by knowing Your lifestyle should be like this Your feelings should be like this And your mental state should be like this And then naturally this will remain your state of mind So study this science in order to generate that kind of a life A Satvik lifestyle will give you natural state of happiness constantly There is one more thing here What about objects? So many objects are there which I feel happiness is there in the object There is one thing here If you analyze No matter what what the object is whether it is money, it's your home It's the relationships you make it is the people you connect with it is your social media Huh? Many of you are I know very much into social media So all of this you will see in a sense they give you your security they give you a comfort They give you diversion from your sorrowful states from your concentrations they give you diversion from all this but the feeling of happiness just think of intense happiness when you have felt it, this age happens many times when you feel the freedom of complete happiness and you will see that it was a time when you are bereft of objects it was a state of liberation sort of happiness usually contribute to your comfort and security levels, I mean objects, this is where they contribute in your happiness, they are very valid objects, it is important to have security, it is important to have comfort at this level, but don't invest your entire understanding only at that level, this is what I am trying to tell you you happiness depends on very many other higher things which if you can generate in your system through practices you will always be happy whether the object comes into your life or not your happiness is not dependent on the object, object came into your life temporarily to teach you a few things and to give you comfort and security but your happiness is generated in your system by yourself so this understanding will gradually come to us as we go on with this course one more thing which I would like to point out to you is you see things do not actually define who you are and how you are but your level of awareness your intense aliveness which you feel in your system that brings you a lot of happiness that defines you in a sense what does it mean? you see a burst of aliveness or awareness in your system will give you bring you more happiness than any object Yeah, I feel KIA. I have a baby. You're extremely alert and aware and Concentrated not maybe a particularly on any object It's just a burst of aliveness and awareness it brings you a lot of happiness Which objects may not bring that level of happiness? so understand happiness depends on many factors and level of happiness, so understand happiness depends on many factors and happiness arises at different levels in your own system at every level there are different degrees of happiness, okay are you getting each bit of information analyze and see in your own mind if this is true or not there are different levels of happiness available to you at each level there are different degrees of happiness you can go into it explore all these dimensions and get a very mature view of what happiness is about and this is what yoga and Vedanta are going to help you do otherwise there are a lot of misconceptions we can have about happiness now suppose I start thinking happiness depends only on objects, what will I be doing throughout my life only chasing objects isn't it, if I have never understood happiness is something that occurs in my system and my system contributes to my experience of happiness, my awareness contributes to my experience of happiness, I will never invest in this kind of thinking so get certain ideas clear in your mind happiness is a state of my mind it's a cognitive experience and so I must try to improve the states of my mind in order to get better and better happiness do you understand this? so this is how we will be studying it and apply this hedonic treadmill to yourself and see how true it is. It's a famous concept now. If you study positive psychology you will get all these ideas that it's not just a theory it is something happening in your system how your mind tends to misreport happiness, how your mind tends to give the credit to your senses. Senses are meant they are survival safeguards for you but if you invest your entire happiness only in the senses, you will get a very limited form of happiness, that's all a very low kind of happiness yes, there is a question there many a times when the doctors and the nurses, those who choose to engage in missionary institutions Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. you see that happiness is a little longer lasting than a mere sensory level happiness it's a little longer lasting the happiness born of higher engagement the happiness born of meaning you know Seligman's famous equation you see Martin Seligman is the father of positive psychology. This is the real field of psychology that has caught up over the decades. It started sometime in the 1990s. It is studying happiness, the science of happiness. And there you will see he gave this famous equation sometime in the late 1990s, H is equal to P plus E plus M, that was the equation he first gave out, happiness is equal to, let me write it here for you, H is equal to P plus E plus M. Now P here, he said is pleasure, E is engagement and M is meaning. But quickly they found out that P is much, much lesser than engagement and that is much, much lesser than meaning. If you have enough meaning to your life, you don't even need these two. If you have a purposeful life, you can dispense with these two. If you have deep engagement, you don't even need this. And only this gives very little joy. In fact, it addicts you, it puts you into that hedonic treadmill. And so now today he has given another theory, not he actually positive psychology, of course he is there in that, he has given the theory of PERMA. This is the current theory of well-being in positive psychology. Current theory of well-being, you know what these factors stand for P is not pleasure, it is positive emotions, E is engagement, R is positive relationships, M is meaning, A is achievement. This is the current theory of happiness in positive psychology. So you see the transition because they have understood what are the actual factors which bring gladness to your mind that is why I said mind management is important if all this has to become a reality in your experience try to see it Parma it is all their mental experiences positive emotions happen in your mind engagement is through your mind relationship you will study EQ in one happen in your mind engagement is through your mind, relationship you will study EQ in one of these classes, this is also through your mind bringing meaning into your life that is so very important to happiness and achievement here means something more than mere personal goals something more than ego based goals so all of this will bring a very enriching kind of happiness into your life, if you do even a little bit then you will know at once that there is a lot of sense in this so you see this is what they have come to today the happiness which he spoke of engagement which he spoke of it is longer lasting than a mere sensory level of happiness but the longest lasting happiness is what yoga and Vedanta are going to teach you about the happiness which gives you which absorbs you into something where your mind will not flicker from that state so we will come to that, this is just an introductory class as I told you what are the parts of happiness which we will be studying in this course you see first of all we are going to study meditation techniques yes a really here because if happiness is a state of mind how you are going to handle that mind how you are going to study it and help it discriminate properly for that a basic steadiness a basic kind of purification of the mind is required so we will will be studying happiness, basic calmness of mind, your entire knowledge depends on that. Vivekananda used to say this, knowledge depends upon calmness of mind. So we will be studying something of this, then a proper knowledge of your emotional states, it's important because one of the definitions of happiness is positive effect which means what kind of mood prevails in your mind What is your feeling? Hindi has beautiful words Your feeling is your introduction So if this feeling is good, you will naturally be happy You don't even need objects to keep you happy So this is what EQ is about, you know you will naturally be happy you don't even need objects to keep you happy so this is what EQ is about you know emotional quotient emotional intelligence what kind of moods prevail in my mind what kind of moods do I encourage or here we have an enormous contribution from yoga vedanta tradition how do you refine your moods how do you refine your emotions and make sure that you remain in a positive mood all the time. There is no fluctuation between a negative and a positive mood. I can't assure you that at the end of this course you will all be only in positive moods. You have to work on your mind. That's the thing. That's the whole thing. Now, this will also help you understand that there are certain things which because we don't understand them deep enough we take the wrong route like for example sometimes we give in to greed, we give in to greed, we give in to anger without understanding its effects on our mind, by doing all this what happens is our mind itself gets into states like stress over anxiety gets into such states and then you have to work for coming out of those states so how to control all this, we will be studying then there is one very important concept which you have to know one of the paths to happiness is what is called savoring. It means appreciation with gratitude. Do you do this? Appreciating something with gratitude. Look at your life so far till now. How many good things have come into your life? Are you thankful for them? You haven't made a big contribution to society, family or parents But you have achieved a lot So are you grateful for that on an everyday basis? Do you appreciate their efforts for a simple plate of food to come on your table everyday? Do you know how many people have worked for it? At least 15 people have worked for it atleast 15 people have worked for it starting from that farmer who is sowing grains are you thankful for that plate of food many times what happens is we take things for granted this is my property, I should get it my father has paid my fees this is not the case if you are not grateful for every experience if this thing does not come to our If you are not grateful for every experience. If this thing doesn't come in our mind. You will not be happy. Gratefulness and Appreciation Of the good things in your life. If you make these two a habit. You will remain in happy states of mind. See how small This point is. But it makes a big Difference in our life. Be grateful for whatever you have got Always remember, that's why we had all these customs We would say a grace, a prayer when a plate of food came in front of us You are thanking the people who have made this possible So if you maintain this state of mind, you will not suffer stress You will not suffer unnecessary anxiety So get into these positive states of mind through these simple disciplines There is one more thing, this will help you, an understanding of EQ, emotional intelligence Will help you build your interpersonal relationships You know many times all your problems are usually emotional insecurities, all your sorrows and woes are due to emotional insecurities. What is the key factor there where you are erring, where you are choosing the wrong road? It is when you always assert what is right in a relationship. A relationship is a concession to your emotions. If you keep asserting the right factor, the relationship will not work. You will either be peaceful or you will be right. Choose between the two. You want peace or you want to be right? You want peace obviously, isn't it? So then stop this assertion, self-assertion in human relationships, especially interpersonal relationships. You see it's a small point but it makes a big difference in your life. If you keep on applying your left brain as you apply in science to an interpersonal relationship, the relationship will not work. So EQ in emotional intelligence means knowing these small little things which will help you remain in a happy state of mind otherwise if you keep on asserting what is right the relationship will not work for you rather assert peace what will bring about peace either peace or right remember this is the equation then meaning here you see we discussed meaning meaning contributes a lot to your understanding of happiness if you are doing purposeful activity which is giving deep meaning to your life you will remain in a glad state of mind all the time this is what happens when you see people who do not have anything much yet they are in happy state of mind it means they have invested their life energies into something very meaningful that's why they are able to remain happy something which out steps your mortality something which out reaches to the whole of humanity something which outlasts the human life span if you invest your life into something like this you will always remain in a glad Happy state of mind See how important this point is So bring meaning to your activity To your thinking Doing something meaninglessly Because my friend is doing it, so I am doing it No more Bring deep level meaning That is why all these things are important In your life, deep thinking Understanding your mind from inside out and meditation, mind management techniques all this will bring you better and better states of mind So this is what we will be doing in this course Another thing is, as I told you EQ factor is one thing, immediate way of changing your moods is to take to physical exercise Have you tried this? If you want to change a bad mood immediately Just take a run or jog around your campus Or go and play tennis, squash Do something with your body Do some physical activity and you will see your mood will change. You see it's a simple point but it will remove you from brooding and unnecessary thinking, unnecessary craving Remaining addicted to your mobile. It will remove you from all these tendencies. So keep yourself physically active. It's an immediate mood changer This is another point and then So keep yourself physically active. It's an immediate mood changer This is another point and then Find your flow Do you know about flow? Have you heard of it? You see flow is a term given to deep absorption It's a it's a term coined by Zigmehal. We will be studying flow. Don't worry If there is a is there in your life you will be happy but if you do not find flow in anything you will be in a distracted erratic state of mind this will not produce happiness to you even if all kinds of good objects are around you even if you have everything if your mind does not experience deep level absorption from time to time it will not have peace Because the nature of the mind is to remain absorbed at a higher level You are not giving him what he is giving You are not giving him what he is giving So it will not remain at peace So you must find your flow What is it that deeply engages you And at what level Different things engage people at different levels Understand your own mind for this. We will study flow in a big way because a lot of your happiness is dependent on this deep level engagement in something. And then of course your attitude, optimism leads to flourish. If you have an optimistic tendency, it will lead to happy states of mind sometimes people do not pay attention to this there are people who deliberately will not see the half glass empty so what is the result of this? what does it lead to? it leads to a pessimistic view of everything, a negative mood. So get out of this by correcting your attitude. Now you are taking a course in science of happiness, you must commit yourself to higher level happiness, make it perpetually in your life. If you do that, you'll get a lot from this course. So don't give in to brooding, negative emotions, anger, hatred, if you don't give in to brooding, negative emotions, anger, hatred, if you don't give in to all that, you will see this is a possibility. Thank you. Aur ek cheez hai, this your understanding of happiness is going to determine your private policy of your life, it is also going to determine public policy. You know how our understanding of happiness, collective understanding of happiness is finally going to decide what you are going to opt for. You see we have a kind of index of development you know GDP is the normal index of development. There are countries like Bhutan which have a different index it's called GNH gross national happiness. They measure happiness levels there's a way of measuring it and they have decided that that is the way the progress of a country is to be judged and what are the measures they have introduced for that you know many of them are subjective measures they have introduced music in schools because it calms your mind. Environmental awareness compulsory for everyone in Bhutan. And there are very, very many factors like this. You make some people call it paternalistic, a very strong measures have been introduced. Whatever it is, you see the country is trying to understand things in terms of a deeper level happiness, trying to understand its progress and development in terms of that. So your private policy will finally decide our public policies also. So get a good grip over what happiness means, what are the ranges available to you, and the different levels of happiness available, and also how it can bring fulfillment to your life It's a possibility with you, don't think that whatever we discuss, meditation or flow or whatever don't think that all these yogis and sadhus do and I cannot do it because I am so busy It is for you, who was told Bhagavad Gita? To whom was Bhagavad Gita told? Arjun, Arjun was a man of action in the world and on the battlefield it was told so remember all these ideas are meant to help you where you are this is what Vivekananda wanted it is not about well somebody in some cave has to do it it you don't have to seek your highest happiness levels there you can bring it to where you are if you train your mind that is the key factor remember this now some other perspectives which will be we will be taking regarding happiness is understanding how your experiences are changing the nature of your brain. You know have you heard of the word neuroplasticity? So whenever we are we are going to study neuroscience perspectives also isn't it? So there this concept becomes very important. How will you study it? You see the changes, the thoughts that you think, the experiences that you have are actually determining the circuits in your brain. Your brain circuits, your neurological connections are decided by the thoughts in your mind and that is why what you think, the thinking is a subjective experience, but what brain circuitry you are creating as a result of that it can be objectively tracked as a third-person perspective and by doing that people have come to the conclusion that yes positive thoughts thoughts of kindness and care and sharing and caring and love this will always keep you happy and if you don't deliberately make this a habit, don't deliberately do this through definite techniques, you will start brooding over something unnecessary or start craving for something which has no meaning to your life or get into an anxiety mode or get into anger or just lays away your time, you can get into these states. So understand the essential training is training of mind. Your neuroplasticity is dependent on your mind. What thoughts you put into your mind, what habits you create is going to decide the brain circuits, the neurological connections you make in your brain and this has been found to be true through so many meditation techniques. You know monks have been studied and there was a recent study which was conducted. I will give you the details of that in which a number of monks actually 256 electrodes were fixed on each monk's brain and they were asked to go into states of meditation and actually Dalai Lama had sent those monks. They were all men given to deep levels of meditation for many hours a day, so they studied the brain activity in these monks and you will be surprised to know that just introduction of a good thought, a thought of say loving kindness something like that and you know the entire prefrontal cortex lit up as it were, the brain activity, the gamma rays became so intense in that brain because he has made that kind of connection, his brain circuits have become like that, his grooving has become like that through the thoughts he has put into his mind, the positive thoughts he has put into his mind, his entire brain circuits have become so refined and positive that just one thought of loving kindness and his whole brain is full of happiness and neuroplasticity is natural for them the entire brain has got fashioned according to these positive thoughts which they have been putting into into their minds this is what I am trying to tell you you see the importance of your thought level the importance of your emotional level in bringing fulfillment into your life. It is actually creating your neurocircuits. It is delinking negative pathways. It is creating positive pathways. I will show it to you on a slide and that is why take charge of your life yourself. Take charge of your happiness yourself. Don't say the object is going to make me happy. After this course, none of you should be able to say that an object is going to make me happy after this course none of you should be able to say that an object is required to make me happy I will generate my happiness by myself the object and the senses will maybe inroads to a state of my mind but the state of mind is mine I can generate it even without the object and you will always remain happy now your happiness will be in your hands so this independence is what knowledge generates for you that is why you see it is important to study this as a science Bhagavad Gita has the statement Nahi Jnanaena Sadrusham Pavitram Iha Vidyate Tatsvayam Yogasam Siddha Kalena Atmanivindate A yogi comes to know of this in time that there is nothing more purifying than knowledge if you know something you will reach that state this is the importance of knowledge so catch these points in a very deep way and you will benefit a lot from it let me start showing you the slides because that is that also requires explanation and we will go into some points of yoga and Vedanta. I would like to open that PPT. Yes. Let us go to the, yeah, full screen. From beginning. Yeah. Now, look at this slide. Here you have a number of objects. All of this you see, it decides your happiness index, your absolute and relative incomes, social relationships, these are all determin it decides your happiness index your absolute and relative incomes social relationships They are all determinants of your happiness consumption patterns your employment status social comparisons Genetics also plays a huge role health age time usage Autonomy self-esteem sense of purpose aspirations all this decide your happiness But as I told you all these are objects which provide you more comfort and security than the burst of happiness that you feel through your awareness you must understand this these are determinants of your happiness at one level and regarding social media and happiness please understand this don't make social media something woeful for you, something sorrowful for you. You know who is the person who invented the iPhone? Tell me. Steve Jobs. Steve Jobs gave the iPhone to the world, he did not give it to his children. Because he said I don't want them addicted to this. I know how technology works. Is technology neutral? Tell works is technology neutral? tell me is it neutral? or not? technology is neutral the problem is the user of the technology is not neutral you understand you are driven by your all sorts of drives all sorts of emotions so many things your moods so the technology in your hand doesn't remain neutral anymore you are going to use it as per your mood so if you do that what happens is you succumb to so many things which you know you finally become an addict of social media and it will rule over you if your mind is not at peace, then see something you use it for your work purposes, nothing more than that. But if you allow it to rule over you, well, you know what will happen, so don't do it. Technology is neutral, but you also must become neutral. That is the whole thing. Now, let's go to the next slide. You see, this is something I want you to notice and learn from. This is a learning curve. It is something very famous. Just read that. The unusual phenomenon of U-shaped learning is found in early childhood cognitive development. For example, a child begins to use the verb spoke. Subsequently, she may use instead speak and later and finally she again uses the word spoke. This learning curve is a part of learning, it happens to everybody. Now why I want you to see this is, in neuroplasticity what happens is when the framework of neuroplasticity is applied to meditation, we suggest that the mental training of meditation is fundamentally no different than other forms of skill acquisition that can induce plastic changes the brain. This means that when you start doing meditation something like this U curve is going to work for you you will be very interested in your meditation and the science of happiness second class third class all right fourth class you may feel like skipping skipping the class or skipping your meditation or your assignment or whatever because of this U curve, I'm telling you this is how it works, any kind of skill acquisition the tendency of the mind is to dip after a certain point and then again it will peak, again you will come for the fifth and the sixth class, so as an ahom, understand this learning curve and make sure that your mind doesn't go just by this did you understand any kind of skill acquisition there will be a few dips in it but you must charge your personality with the desire to actually have your neuroplasticity done fashion your brain as per your positive thoughts you understand as per your meditative practices as per the science of, you understand as per your meditative practices as per the signs of happiness which you are going to understand, don't give in to these dips for this I wanted to show you this slide and then yes you see self-directed neuroplasticity your neuroplasticity should be completely self-directed. Don't wait for just positive experiences to come into your life for your brain to be fashioned positively. You know brain by kya hota hai? Convolutions hota hai na? Within those convolutions are enormous circuits, neurocircuits. What has created those circuits, those connections? Your conditioning, your thoughts, your emotions, your thinking, your attitudes your interpersonal relationships, your experiences, so remember you have created the convolutions in your brain and the circuitry there and you can change it Neuroplasticity ka matla bhi hai, the brain is plastic, malleable, you can change those circuits, you are not hardwired for anxiety or suffering or fear or hardwired by your genetics, nothing of that sort. You can change the circuitry in your brain through your mind, through your thinking, your thoughts. So once you understand this, you take your life into your hands. You see you can do all of that. What can you do? You can reinforce neural pathways, self-directed neuroplasticity you can de-link negative pathways you can pattern circuits and all this in our psychology yoga psychology it is called the art of creating sanskars mom and dad say that good sanskars should come in children grandma must have said that so you see this is what they are trying to do through all your disciplines, everyday disciplines which are given to you which were given to you at one time, I don't know now what is being given they are trying to do all this, creating the right brain circuitry for you creating the right thought framework for you, so that your happiness is ensured a positive feeling mood is ensured for you so this self-directed neuroplasticity is something you have to do for yourself now when you will start learning yoga or vedanta the very first steps you must have heard about yam and niyam, they are basic moral disciplines in yoga so this is fundamental There are some disciplines that you should follow Because of which yoga is possible Yoga is nothing but union with a higher reality So this is possible if you have conditioned your mind in a positive way And for this all these disciplines are there in yoga science Like Ahimsa, Satya, Aasthaya. You must be aware that non-violence is non-injury. Satya is speaking the truth always. Aasthaya is non-stealing. Brahmacharya is committing yourself to higher ideals. Aparigraha is non-receiving of gifts. Then in Niyam, there is Shouj, Santosh. Shouj is the purity of your body and mind and santosh contentment, tapas, austerity, swadhyay, self study, ishwar pranidhan, faith in god so why all this is stressed as preliminary disciplines is in order to get self directed neuroplasticity to condition your brain circuits in a particular way to reinforce the positive pathways since the time of neuroplasticity science yoga has become very easy to explain because this is what it is actually doing for you the basic yama and niyama disciplines this is what it is doing for you it is changing your brain circuitry so if you consciously apply this, repeat this in your life a good life, basically a good life committed to higher ideals if you make this your habit, then naturally this will happen to you this is one thing yes what are you believing in this for example we will be believing in hugeness or nothingness we will be believing in huge or nothingness. Like many of the people when they go through happiness they may go through sthoolta and some go through sukshma daap. So what will we be believing between huge and nothing? Whatever is gross or thick has a very low content Whatever is fine Nuclear physics will also tell you this Look at the amount of energy a huge bundle of wood gives you and look at the energy you can extract from a single atom Whatever is fine gives more energy So remember we are actually going to study Yoga and Vedanta are subtle things It requires a subtle intellect, a subtle kind of understanding And it will give you very important equations for happiness Try to go from the gross to the subtle You understand? Don't commit yourself only to gross forms of happiness. That is what we are going to go into. There are higher and higher levels of happiness. In the last slide we saw that you are talking about the development of Sanskara. Yes. But if we go by the principle of a strong yog, so gradually we remove Sanskaras from us. Now that is a matter of later. See, when you come to the level of meditation, you have to remove thoughts from your mind, but the basic requirement for meditation is Yam and Niyam, to maintain that state, to reach that state, you have to have this fundamental change in your life, some kind of fundamental discipline which commits you to a good way of living which all of you are doing, you understand this is at the heart of creating good sanskars, if you have such sanskars then you will naturally get meditation, your mind will naturally settle, understand, yoga will become easy, so that's why I am saying scientifically you see through neuroscience we are trying to explain through neuroplasticity how these disciplines bring changes in your brain ok now you see here this slide here i want you to understand this first equation very important we were discussing flow now in the yogic science they give you an equation for happiness I have invented this equation, they don't give it, they just state it somewhere and if you put all the facts together you will get this equation you see what they are trying to tell you is if you are able to maintain a stable vritti and pratyay we will discuss what this is and reach the state of ekagrata, anything you concentrate upon will become joyful and dear to you. Now you think and see this is a reality in your life, you may not have liked mathematics in school, but what did you do? You had to get into IIT, so you studied and applied your mind again and again and again I didn't like it So, this is what we are saying, stable vritti means when you think something, it creates a modification in your mind, that is called vritti and the thought is called pratyay now if you have a stable vritti which means very stable thought form in your mind you will reach the state of ekagrata complete concentration and that will make any object you focus upon give you great joy it will become very dear to you so this is a wonderful equation right what is it saying to you? what is it trying to tell you? Learn the art of concentration, learn the art of keeping your mind stable on one thing and you will always remain happy. If your mind is completely discursive, completely scattered all the time, restless, can you get happiness? Ashantasya kutasukham, Bhagavad Gita. If you are completely peaceless and restless all the time, you cannot have happiness. So understand this equation. That is why yoga psychology will give you these three steps, calm mind in focus mode. It is called Sajatya ekadaviti prabhaha in yoga. This you understood just now and then contentment the art of emptying mind job care oh so that comes at a little later stage you are a in perfect control of your thoughts if your thoughts are coming at such a rate that you are not able to control them you will again go into a state of sorrow if you are able to control them keep keep a little distance from them. I remember when I was a teenager also, my mind would work very fast. Many of you are in the same situation. Whenever I have given talks here, invariably one question was, the mind is too fast and restless all the time. So how to change this state of affairs? It is possible to do it. We will go into Yoga techniques. And we will try to study this. You should put a distance between yourself and your thoughts. It is possible. Empty your thoughts on an everyday basis for some time. Even if you do it for 2 minutes, it is still beneficial. If you empty your mind, it will lead you to a state of control over your mind. And the method of keeping positivity in the mind you see my my three karuna mudita upeksha these are all terms to indicate a positive state of mind at all cost don't give went to negative emotions to your mind so these are the ways to happiness art of controlling response and reaction and have a good smile all the time deliberately don't go about with a very sad face, Swamiji and Vivekananda used to say if you feel sad please shut yourself up in your room don't spread that sadness to others by coming out so keep a happy disposition to yourself always so we will go deeper into this but now I want to tell you we have few more minutes we have 10 more minutes now let me come to vedantic idea of happiness this also need to be covered in every class because we are doing yoga vedanta understanding of happiness now vedanta gives you very powerful ideas you have to follow me carefully to understand how to study vedanta now here i have made your work easy i have given you a model of how it is trying to understand the human personality, who am I if you ask this is the model which Vedanta will give you it's called the panchakosha model of the human personality it states that you are actually a unit of pure consciousness called the Atman functioning through an intellect mind and prana body complex you are functioning through this complex you are actually a unit of pure consciousness called the Atman and if you want to change a person you must change his awareness of himself this is a basic Vedantic idea if you want to change a person, you see this is something which Abraham Maslow also said. You must change his awareness of yourself. If your awareness of yourself is only that you are a body or if you are only your thoughts, you will always be in a very restless mode. If you are the awareness which is seeing your thought, if you are the awareness which is handling this body, you are in charge of your personality Are you getting this? If you actually analyze your thoughts whatever is happening in your mind you will naturally come to this See how Vedanta is learned, not through models like this This is an objective model You are actually taking a third person perspective You actually study Vedanta by analyzing your own existential awareness does this make any sense to you, existential awareness now look at me, look here carefully try to understand what I am trying to say, otherwise you will not understand anything of Vedanta the very genesis of Vedanta is understanding existential awareness which means what? When you say, who am I? What comes to your mind? Picture of your body? That is the picture of you? And you are 100% convinced that is all of you? But notice this. This picture is coming in your mind and your awareness is acknowledging that this is my personality and it rises, this image rose in your mind, it will go out of your awareness also it rises, everything rises in your awareness, your thoughts come into your awareness, they go out of your awareness the objective world comes into your awareness, it goes out your awareness, what is the fundamental reality then about you? it's your awareness, it's in your own experience just now it is in your awareness that thoughts are coming and moving out it is in your awareness that images are coming, popping in and popping out of it is in your awareness that body consciousness is arising and falling it is in your awareness that thoughts are peeping and going out so your awareness is more fundamental to your very thought process more fundamental to your identification with body or objects this is called existential enquiry, vichar jo hum kehte hain agar aap isko pakad pa catch it you will enter Vedanta if you can't catch it you will need models like this, this objective model it will not convince you of the truth of Vedanta it's just a concept isn't it try to analyze your yeah you are capable of this a very well-developed sharp intellect committed to higher values becomes capable of analyzing existential awareness think about yourself Vedanta introduces you to yourself to your true self and the experience is available to you just now if you are able to catch the awareness in which your thoughts are moving in and out of this is your experience right now but do you know what is happening? the identification with the thought is supreme, identification with objects is supreme, you need to give more thought to this for it to become reality, it appears like that, but actually speaking everything is walking in and out of your awareness only, if you can hold that awareness then you will understand Vedanta very well, so this is the way you will have to understand Vedanta and it will give you a lot many ideas on happiness because actually it is studying happiness, Upanishads like Taithiri Upanishad, Brihadaranyaka Upanishad they all give you marvelous ideas on happiness and we will be studying them but basically you must understand how to do existential enquiry. You must apply to yourself. What is happening in my mind now? What is my experience? What is your experience just now? Everything is coming and going out of your awareness. Cache that awareness factor in you. Analyze it. this is the whole thing and in this process what is, you will arrive at what, you will arrive at the fundamental truth about your own being, Vedantic is saying that happiness is an inherent part of your being, it is inside you you When you project on an object and credit the object It's a delusion on your part Happiness is within you It comes out from within your system You superimpose it on an object and you give the object the credit This is what Vedanta will finally tell you But to understand this You will have to penetrate into your experience of reality not just through models, the basic datum which Vedanta works with is existential awareness your own existence just now try to penetrate this, what we have discussed now you must allow it to circulate in your mind for some time and it will appear, jaisa relativity physics mein karte ho na, first time you heard it, it will appear very strange and bizarre but second time it was better, third time it was quite obvious, aisa hi hota hai Vedanta mein, so this is something you have to penetrate into by experience This is the whole thing Now this model is actually telling you You are a unit of pure consciousness functioning through a body mind complex Right? This is what this model is saying Now understand your definition of yourself according to Vedanta Is consciousness functioning through a body mind complex Now understand your definition of yourself according to Vedanta is consciousness. Functioning through a body-mind complex. This is your introduction. Have you ever thought that I am actually that awareness functioning through this instrumentation. Have you ever thought that? So Vedanta is telling you this first. That you do not know yourself. You are awareness functioning through a body-mind complex so if you catch this idea you will get hold over your body-mind complex so this is how you will be able to control it if you are able to understand you are the awareness behind the mind even so you can watch your thoughts and you are not your body you are using it as an instrument so you can use your body as an instrument, use your body and mind as an instrument to achieve your goals so this is the freedom which Vedanta gives you, so these are some things which you have to understand clearly by application to your own state of being just now actually according to Vedanta what happens is the consciousness which is the Atman it radiates into the intellect that is why you become intelligent it radiates into the mind and that is why the mind becomes conscious it radiates into the pranayama the vital sheath and the body and that is why the mind becomes conscious it radiates into the pranayama, the vital sheath and the body and that is why they become enlivened entities for you and you are identified with all of that so you think you are that this is how it analyses the human personality paradigm why do you think that I am just this body or mind because that consciousness has radiated to that level that is why it appears enlivened your mind appears conscious your body your vital organs everything appear enlivened to you so understand the what they are trying to tell you the basic thing is you are a unit of pure consciousness and you will understand it if you analyze your own existential awareness I will repeat this thing once again and stop here if you do not catch this point it will be very difficult for you to study Vedanta I am not going to explain it to you through models objective models understand your existential awareness when you are not thinking What remains over in your mind Nothing remains Or something remains Awareness always remains in your mind Your thoughts move in and out of that awareness To become conscious of something You require effort Just to be conscious Do you require effort? Just to be aware Because awareness is your natural state You have not given it enough thought just to be conscious do you require effort just to be aware because awareness is your natural state you have not given it enough thought so you are not understanding this just now give it enough thought and you will understand this is the actual reality everything moves in and out of your awareness awareness you always are you always where and you always will be you identified so quickly with the thought process and so quickly with objects that you lost sight of awareness. Your thinking got a little hazy. But understand this, once you catch this point, you see you will be in charge of your mind. Because you are the consciousness shining behind the mind. So this is how you have to go under this research let me stop here because if I give you too many thoughts on this line you will not be able to grasp it let me stop at this slide we have we are trying to understand happiness through all these means so whatever you have studied today try to digest it you have studied today tries to understand you how yoga helps you understand yourself and what are the different levels of happiness which we discussed and what is neuroscience about how you can change your mind how you can change flow now questions are coming but there is announcement of assignment ok question you can ma'am how to identify the awareness when you sleep very good very good this is a real Vedantic question. Now you see, the Vedantic answer to this is In sleep your awareness doesn't go off. What happens is your mind goes off. Your mind shuts down. When the mind shuts down, you are experiencing something through the mind. So when mind shuts down, you have no experience or you think maybe there was no awareness you understand the instrument of perception has shut down awareness never shuts down it is a vital point in vedanta because awareness never shuts down because it is your real nature your real nature cannot shut down the instrument of perception shut down so you had no experience so when you get up you say I did not know anything, I slept happily but I did not know anything, this state also we will analyze in one of these classes, the state of deep sleep, because it gives you a kind of very wonderful feeling of happiness, the state of deep sleep, ye kaise hota hai we will study in this. Okay, yes anybody else with questions? No, we can make the announcement for the assignment in that case.
 Thank you very much. In Last class we discussed an important idea which was the fact that happiness is right within us it is actually the nature of the Atman and all that we have to do to bring out that happiness is enable our body and mind so train our body and mind that it is able to stream out that joy and understanding that the very source of this happiness is within us now this is an important idea but you can very well ask the question what is the proof for this claim it's a huge claim that happiness is not in the object outside you superimpose it on the object and start liking the object but it is right within you and it's coming out of your system. So now what is the proof or the evidence for this? You see this is true, it will bring a paradigm shift in your thinking, a 180 degree shift actually. So then is there any proof, any evidence for this? Now according to the Upanishad, the Mandukya Upanishad especially, this can be proved even logically, this can be proved even logically, this can be understood very clearly, intellectually, you see this is how they do it, what they are trying to do is something very simple, they are going to analyse the 3 states of everyday experience, Jo hum Jagrat, Swapna, Sushupti kehte hai na, waking, dream and deep sleep state, you see this is the data they are going to work with with only this much data they are going to draw tremendous conclusions. Now this is your everyday experience. Yes, yes we are going to go into that, we are going to go into that because what they are telling you is clue to the presence of the Atman and clue to the fact that the source of happiness is right within you the Atman is right within you they are going to prove this through this kind of an analysis of the three states of everyday experience which you yourself experience every day isn't it you we have the waking state Jagrat we are all in Jagrat just now then when you go to sleep you go into a dream state Swapna that is called Swapna Vastha after sometime you go into a deep sleep state that is deep sleep without dream that state then again you wake up and you come back to Jagrat so it's your experience these three states they will analyze these three states to give you these conclusions regarding the presence of the Atman and regarding where joy or happiness comes from so just follow me carefully and you will get the point you will get the logic of it but if you distract your attention you would just miss the logic so follow this carefully you see what is happening in the waking state this is something for all of us to ponder about because we never pay attention to the subject, simple facts about our life it just skips us. Now they are asking you to pay attention to the subject, to yourself, what happens in your waking state? In your waking state your senses are fully awake, taking sense objects from the outside world sending it to your brain, your mind is fully awake, your mind is interpreting all that information, it is actually giving you your decisions, telling you what to do, what not to do with all the input that is coming in. So senses are fully awake, mind is fully awake in the waking state, jagrat, just now. What happens in your dream state when you go to sleep? Senses are shut down. Please see this, senses are not working. The eyes are shut, the ears are shut, you are not taking in sense impressions, but the mind is working, especially the subconscious part of your mind so out of that you are spinning your own dream isn't it your dream world is it real you are spinning it and in the dream world it is absolutely real to the dreamer only when you wake up you say that was a dream but in the dream itself it was absolutely real isn't it in fact what you experience in the dream itself it was absolutely real is not it. In fact, what you experience in your dream it is an actual experience. If you see a tiger you will feel fear, if you see something good you will feel happy. So, in your dream world it is not different from the waking world in the sense you actually experience the dream world. Only when you wake up you say oh that compared to this that was a dream but the dream itself was very real to you, in fact you need dream water to quench dream thirst, dream food to appease dream hunger, ya aapki avastha hai usko aapne study nahi kiya hai abhi tak, so now we are going to look at it closely, this is what is happening in your dream state, swapna Vastha and then you pass into the deep sleep state what is that state like you see it is your own experience analyze it and see what happens in the deep sleep state the senses are shut down the mind is also shut down the mind is not operating this mind is not operating in your dreams deep sleep state but you have a certain level of experience what is the level of experience which you have listen to this carefully otherwise you will miss the logic what is your experience in the deep sleep state jo hum sushupti kehte hai, it is an experience of well I did not actually encounter any object but I slept happily. I had a very restful peaceful sleep. This is your experience is not it? I did not experience any form of knowledge. I did not encounter any object but I rested very happily. I was very happy in deep sleep. This is your experience in the deep sleep state. Ab yeh record kaun kar raha hai? very happily I was very happy in deep sleep this is your experience in the deep sleep state, now who is recording that you did not encounter any object, somebody is recording it isn't it, in your dream state your mind was recording what dream was occurring, in the deep sleep state how do you know there was no encounter with any object nothing popped up in your mind and also the feeling of restfulness, peacefulness happiness who recorded that experience aap soch ke dekho there must have been a recorder otherwise how do you know nothing happened in that state and yet I was happy so this is what this Upanishad is telling you subliminal consciousness in some form has persisted to record that nothing no object no objective encounter was there in that state no dream was there in that state and what is the nature of this experience Sanskrit me hum kehte hai don't distract yourself don't look at the door you will miss the point if you look at the door just remain focused on the study which we are doing just now Sushupti mein aapki kya avastha hoti hai Sanskrit mein usse kehte hai Sukham aham aswapsam na kinchid mayavedisham iska matlab hai I slept happily and I did not know anything now tell me is was it an experience of the absence of all objects or was it the absence of all experience what was your it was your own state first one isn't it it was the experience of absence very good you have experienced the absence of everything is called in Patanjali Yoga Sutra Abhav Pratyay Pratyay of Abhav which means you yourself acknowledge the absence of everything else and as well as the fact that you slept happily which means what even when the mind is shut down there is something present which is recording whatever is happening and that has experienced great bliss that was in great bliss which means what happiness must lie behind the mind, because your mind had shut down technically in deep sleep state your mind is not working so where did the happiness come from and what was it that acknowledge the absence of something so it is an experience of absence it is a very vital point now this leads to two conclusions you see you are the person who is awake you are the person who goes into the dream state you are the person who goes into the deep sleep state that same you wakes up and again becomes the waker which means there is a continuity in your I isn't it you don't wake up as a different person the same person wakes up so there's a continuity through all the three states which means what the same self you can say an invariable has passed through three variable states the three variables are Jagrat, Swapna and Sushupti and you are the invariable there actually speaking the three states passed over you and also this is one point the second point is you experienced great happiness even without the functioning of the mind so happiness the source of happiness must lie behind the mind aapko logic pata chal raha hai, kaise find out kar raha hai? you see two vital points with the data available to you in within your own experience this is how they conclude that happiness belongs to the atman you are that atman passing through these three states actually speaking the three states passed over you when consciousness is intense when awareness has truly been cultivated through spiritual practice you will see the three states have actually passed over you, you have been the common factor there just say agar may if I say I A plus I B plus I C all that Mandukya Upanishad is doing is removing the i into a plus b plus c it is isolating the witness of the three states the sakshi of the three states and telling you are that you have been recording all that is happening this is your own experience and you also found out you logically found out that even when the mind was shut down you experienced happiness that means happiness must lie behind the mind in the self in the Atman itself that is why they say you are the source of happiness let me illustrate this with an example suppose you are sitting on a road ok follow this example carefully you are sitting on a road quietly and suddenly a BMW passes by. You got very excited. It is just speeding by and you just followed the BMW for as far as it went, as far as you could follow because you are very excited with speed. You see speed is life at this age. Speed is meaning. So it just zoomed past and you got very excited and you saw it. Then you closed your eyes and started dreaming, daydream that you are driving the BMW. That is your great dream that one day you will own a BMW and you will be driving it. So, you drive and go and you reach 300 kilometers per hour and you just enjoy your ride and you come back and the dream breaks, daydreaming breaks, then you are again sitting and watching the road, you are unchanged, when the real BMW came that is like a jagrat state, you understand your waking state, through your senses you are understanding, senses and mind you are understanding what is happening, you got enamouredored by it the same thing got translated into your daydream that is your Swapna state something similar to that and where you were the owner of the BMW you see you spun your own world and it was absolutely real to you it had its effect on you and then when the dream also breaks you are sitting quietly and watching the road. The you is persisting, you are there. You saw all these three things. Similar thing is happening in Jagrat, Swapna and Sushupti. You are always present, these three states are passing over you. Now what Mandukya Upanishad is doing is, is removing the I isolating the I from these three states and telling you since you pass through these three states what does it mean you are separate the invariable is separate from the variables you understand this is how the Atman which you are passes through these three states and understands at least it should be able to understand that it is the source of happiness it lends happiness to this system which lends happiness to objects and then you superimpose that happiness on objects and start giving credit to the objects the actual happiness came right from within you remember the Atman is the source for happiness that is what all the entire Vedanta is saying this you are the source for happiness it comes out also through your system it was an error in your mind that you superimposed it on the object gave all the credit to the object and kept on chasing the object all your life so understand how they are trying to prove this to you. Isn't it a very logical format you tell me? They are not asking you to believe in it. Your own states of experience, three states of experience are being analyzed. It is data available to you. If you think over this repeatedly, you will understand very clearly what they are saying that which is the witness of these three states Jagrat, Swapna and Sushupti that which sees the mind rise and the mind block out and that which is the very essence of your ego that is the self that is the Atman which you are that is your very own nature so happiness is your nature if you so train your body and mind that very happiness will come out of your own system then you can handle your life as you wish this is the fundamental idea in the Vedanta consciousness is your your very nature because the Atman is of the nature of consciousness existence is your very nature and bliss is your very nature This is you, don't think it is another objective reality to be worshipped outside of you This is your real nature and using this you will be able to understand the very source of all your joy the very source of meaning in life and this is what this is how the Mandukya Upanishad gives you in a you see this is the smallest Upanishad you know of all the Vedanta is the very essence of the Vedas and it comes to you in the form of Upanishads text one of these text is Mandukya Upanishad and that gives this analysis, analysis of the three states to prove to you the existence of the Atman and to prove to you where happiness comes from. Yes. What is the difference between Aham Bhav and Self? What is the difference between Atma Vastu and Aham? Can you tell me what is the difference? Just now when we say Aham Bhav, what we mean is the ego We are talking about the ego, the ego is nothing but a shadow of that self, ego rises in the mind, it's a kind of vritti in the mind which declares I, I, I, it quickly identifies with the body and mind, what the Upanishad is telling you is, this ego is the shadow of the real thing it represents something very real the real thing is this Atman which is a unit of pure consciousness shining within you that gives lens consciousness to your mind makes it conscious and that is why your ego starts functioning that lens consciousness to your body that is why your body gets enlivened that starts functioning and you quickly identify with this body and mind and you say that much only is me but your real nature is that pure consciousness so pay a little attention to this fact I is the real you, what you are calling B just now is the I identified with this body mind complex Samajh mein aara hai aapko, it is the reflected light of pure consciousness, it first gets reflected in your mind in your buddhi and you start calling it I, I you understand and you function through that but its a reflection remember of something very substantial, something very real the real you is the atman, usi ko upanishad mein atman kehte aap soch ke dekho iss se zyada, can there be any topic more interesting than this its about you, it's dealing entirely about you and so for some time at least dwell deeply on this fact this is my real nature when I say I, I mean the Atman but what is happening is it gets reflected as the ego in the mind, it first gets reflected in the mind and I start calling that reflection as I, the ego in the mind, it first gets reflected in the mind and I start calling that reflection as I, the ego, that quickly identifies with the body and the mind and with the world of objects. So then I start thinking I am an entity like this with this particular name, with this particular qualification, with this particular position, so I identify with all of this but your real nature is always pure consciousness which is existence and bliss so at least as a dharana this must go into your mind you understand this is the source of your happiness and power and strength remember this one day you will understand how vital, how important, how powerful this idea is ye idea nahi hai, This is the actual truth about you but just now at least it should become a very strong impression, deep idea in your mind. So one day you will understand the truth about it. Whenever you are asking for happiness you know what you are doing, you are knocking from inside. Rumi ka ek bahut sundar statement hai. You might have heard of Jalaluddin Rumi. He was a Sufi mystic, a Persian poet in 13th century. He made this wonderful statement once, I knocked and the door opened and I realized I was knocking from within. I was knocking from inside. You are knocking from inside. When you ask for happiness, you are knocking from inside, when you ask for happiness you are the very source of happiness, uska realization nahi hua hai, isliye you don't know where to search for it so you keep chasing where the senses are turned outward you start searching in objects isiliye yog vedanta sadhana pehle kaise aaram hota hai, shut your eyes a bit turn inward and see what is happening at least the knowledge of this should be present in your mind you understand the experience of it may not have come but you should know what they are trying to say a very connected an idea connected to this I will give you here which is also very powerful pay attention otherwise again you will miss it. The idea is this, yeh idea aati hai Brihadaranyaka Upanishad mein, it is a conversation between Yajnavalkya and Maitreyi, aapko pata hai kaun the Yajnavalkya and Maitreyi, Yajnavalkya was a great Rishi, a jnani, a Brahma jnani, one who had known the supreme reality and his wife was Maitreyi when he was leaving home to go to the forest for austerity for renunciation he tells his wife I leave all my wealth for you Maitreyi was his wife and she said well what will I do with this wealth will it get me immortality he said no, no chance of wealth getting immortality immortality shashvat jeevan mujhe kisse milega and he said no wealth will not get you that then she said then I have no use of it tell me that which will make me immortal this is what we are all asking for tell me that which will make me mortal and then he gives out this teaching it is very interesting you just listen to me mortal and then he gives out this teaching it is very interesting you just listen to the mantra and then I will explain it he says now are a path to come I put the pre-operative the art monastic amaya put the pre-operative now are a jaya a kama a jaya pre-operative atman astu kamaya jaya pre-operative now are a sarvasya kamaya sarvam priyambhavati, atmanastu kamaya sarvam priyambhavati which means anything is dear to you due to the presence of this Atman, where this Atman is present there will be happiness, there will be joy that object becomes dear to you. The husband is not dear for the sake of the husband but because the Atman is present there the husband is dear this is what he is saying. The wife is not dear for the sake of the wife but because the Atman is present there, consciousness is present there so that entity becomes dear. Everything is dear if consciousness is present there. If consciousness is absent that thing will not become dear. Why do we fear death? Consciousness is absent that thing will not become dear, why do we fear death? Consciousness is absent, a person who is very dear if that person dies you lose connection, you do not like just the body, why consciousness is absent? Are you seeing it? So what do you actually love? What is actually dear to you? Consciousness, usi mein agar research na hua ho, who's case I'm but make the harna now who you have missed the essential point of life isn't it so see how logically they are pointing out to you how to proceed anything becomes dear to you due to the presence of consciousness that is the very source of your happiness that is the art man that is why they say where you find the Atman that thing becomes dear to you Atmanastu Kamaya Sarvam Priyambhavati wonderful idea you see how Kitna Gabhir hai, it is a very deep idea if you can internalize think about at least two three things like this you you see many things will become very clear in your life, you will know how to proceed, you will not invest your energies in the wrong things. In today's introduction, we learnt 3 things very importantly, first of all your sense of I, actually it indicates what, it signifies what, it signifies the Atman within you a unit of pure consciousness within you and secondly that is the source of all your happiness that is the source of consciousness that is existence that is happiness and wherever that Atman is present wherever consciousness is present you start loving that thing you start loving that place you start loving that thing, you start loving that place, you start loving, kyu hume achcha lagta hai, natural scenery, temples, there's a kind of vibration there, a subtle pure vibration of consciousness that's why you start loving it, why do you love small babies they may do such stupid things they can't even talk, fresh consciousness coming into manifestation as life so you love it, just see this for yourself originally think about it where there is consciousness there is life so there is love there is joy, so you are the very source of happiness and consciousness don't make a mistake about this at least jankar rakna hai kis taraf jana hai what I should be seeking for in life now let me go into another point here do you have any questions on that on this Mandukya Upanishad which I just explained it's a vital point if you miss it you have missed a vital understanding I will tell you, was it clear the three states of experience which are your own states, how they drew out the witness from these three states because you are able to give your experience in the three states, you must be apart from the three states and also the source of your happiness even when the mind shut down you verily declared you slept happily which means the source of your happiness is behind the mind two points and wherever this Atman is found there you will find happiness three points ok clear to all of you now yes happiness is innate within, you see this is the fundamental premise you don't require too much thinking to come to this happiness actually lies within you, it streams out of you due to delusion in your mind you superimpose it on objects and you start thinking that is responsible for my happiness I am not saying objects will absolutely not give you happiness, they may stimulate the happiness within you that is their value but the happiness streams out from within you What about ego? Okay, ego is actually a part of your mind. When the Atman is not known, what you will be? It will be the ego. It is an identification of the reflected light of the consciousness of self with your buddhi, not even your buddhi, with so many other things, with the contents of your mind so main ye hoon, main vo hoon, main aisa hoon, main waisa hoon, yehi, ego ka picture itna hi hota hai it's a shadow of the real self, at least you must have some idea, clear idea about the self then you can function as the shadow, in the transactional world you need a kind of ego to function but you must know what it represents. See if you penetrate into consciousnessa. Consciousness is never in the plural. There is only one consciousness manifesting in different bodies and minds. We are used to thinking of ourselves in terms of discrete entities, isn't it? I am I and you are you. Humein pata nahi hai I ka matlab kya hai, you ka matlab kya hai. We have never penetrated into the real I if you penetrate into yourself truly you will see you as awareness is the same as the other person as awareness because in awareness do awareness is not there, one thing is there, it is manifesting through different bodies and minds so what will you become for me? You are me in another form. You understand? I will be you in another form. Ek rishi ek sant ki drishti aise hote hai. Uske liye other nahi rehta. The other person is me in another form. Or ek only one person has this kind of drishti in your own life and that is your mother. You know? Aapki mata ki drishti in your own life and that is your mother you know, aapki mata ki drishti mein aap alag cheez nahi ho, alag entity nahi ho, you are an extension of her, aap usi ke anshe ho, so a mother's drishti and a rishi's drishti this is the similarity that is why ye dono hi pooje hai humare liye, inki drishti aisi hoti hai, because of penetration into their own sense of I they have realized the unity between themselves and others you understand so this is a very valuable teaching of the Upanishad we will now go into yes. till you come to the realization of the Atman you have to work you have to employ this body and mind in order to do effective work in the world to work your way towards the state of realization. It is not a matter of thinking, it is not a matter of just having a few concepts in your head. Realization is such a thing that if you get a glimpse of it in your mind, it will make you work all the more because you see what is the body and mind meant for tell me if I say now well goal to and I'm a master lab so make which make a runga you will only become lazy use your body and mind to work your way towards that goal because it is not a concept it's not a thought, thought can lead you to that it's a state of pure being and it takes a lot of effort the more you do work in this world in an unselfish way the more you clear your mind to go towards that state, understand? That's why try to convert your work into Karma Yoga Not to give up work If you give up work in your present condition, you will only go into laziness You will destroy your life That is why there is no way to run away This is not to mean, you give up something and run away somewhere In order to get self-realization You will not get it that way Whatever is there, it is inside you and run away somewhere in order to get self-realization you will not get it that way jo cheez hai aapke andar hi hai wo Vivekananda used to say each soul is potentially divine the goal is to manifest the divinity within yourself do this either by work, worship, psychic control, philosophy one or all of these and reach the goal this is the whole of religion. Do it as unselfishly as possible, aim at the highest and use whatever you are doing as a means towards that highest this is the way. I mean to physically kuch bhi cheezon se be attached to the normal reality. Yes, do not get unduly attached to the wrong objects ye cheez hai, okay you must be careful the result of this knowledge is you live purposefully in this world meaningfully in this world you are not carried away simply by somebody's emotions by your own emotions by wrong kind of thinking you're not just carried away by that live carefully and aim at the highest now we will go into the I introduce a Vedantic idea deliberately in every class so that it seeps into you and then we will go practically into your everyday problems. How are these ideas going to help you where you are situated just now? How is it going to help you in your mind management? How is it going to help you with all of this? We will go into this now. You see today we are going to especially dwell on the causes for your unhappiness, abhi aapne suna the source of your happiness, the cause for your happiness, how to go to that? Now, what are the everyday causes which are making you unhappy, which are diverting you from where you, the way you should be moving? Pay attention to this and I will come I will come to the question one minute causes for unhappiness I was asking light refines in a part of Atman or mind? Happiness belongs to the Atman it is the nature of the Atman it streams out through your mind if the mind is dense if the mind is wrongly conditioned, it will not allow that light to come out. So your mind also matters. If the mind is clear enough, transparent enough, pure enough, the whole light will come out. You are always happy. Whether you have objects in your life or not, you will be happy. Whether you have people, the right people in your life or not, you will be happy, whether you have people the right people in your life or not you will be happy because remember happiness is the source of your own being. The goal of human life is to so train the human mechanism, the body mind complex that it will allow that light that happiness to come out properly. Iska matlab hai mind par work karna hai. You understand? It is streaming out through the mind. Yes? But if someone trains their mind so much that they actually feel so happy, then his question is very valid. Then why will we want to study, do X, R, do a PhD? Yes, that is the level of realization. What I am telling you is there is a difference between thinking and realization. just now we are thinking about it, this itself is exciting you a lot, you are very happy about it, very good sign but don't think that is the realization, realization is a spiritual experience, you cannot give up work, nobody can give up work, so do your duty unselfishly and use it as a means to go towards that. I will never talk about running away, you don't have to run away from anywhere, but use whatever you are doing as a means to go towards your goals. Yes, yes, exactly, use it like that so let's go into now your causes for your unhappiness the very first cause of your unhappiness is not knowing the cause for your happiness not knowing the source of your happiness, this is called existential sorrow this means alienation of mind from the self if you just see the content of your mind whatever I am telling you is within your experience just now if you do not have such a solid unchanging background behind your mind how will you rely upon your mind, your mind has all sorts of contents, any time it can lead you anywhere, all sorts of emotions are popping up, all sorts of negativities are there in the mind, because there is this fact of the Atman shining behind your mind, you get the strength to overcome the wrong tendencies of the mind, because you are actually the Atman functioning through this body-mind complex ok so actually the one of the main causes for your unhappiness is you have lost touch with this infinite nature within you with the fact of your own existence you have lost touch with that is called alienation of mind from the self is ka parina bhaat g hota hai, don't take this lightly. If you have no self-knowledge, you are at the mercy of the objective world. Samajh mein aara hai? If you have no self-knowledge, you will not be stable within. Your mind, any kind of mood it generates, you will go to objects to change that mood and objects are more changing than your mind, they are more temporary and they are transient so you never get satisfied anywhere, this is the psychology of the restlessness that we feel, constantly we are turning outward alienating mind from self not turning inward for anything constantly only turning outward and that is why many times spiritual knowledge appears like some form of theory because we have not sufficiently gone within ourselves Samajh mein aara hai yeh philosophy banke khadi ho jayegi aapke saamne agar apne upar research na karo I told you existential enquiry is the key to unlocking Vedantic knowledge. If you do not apply to yourself, it will remain a fantastic beautiful theory that is all. And if you are your mind is preoccupied only with your opinions, with the opinions of others, with things which you have not experienced may be yourselves, your mind is dense with content which you have not yet realized, such a mind will not open itself to truth like this spiritual knowledge so pehle mind par work karna hai that is why mind management techniques are so important there is a beautiful story here which I would like to tell you ek baar ek professor aate hain zen master ke paas a professor came to a zen master and told him, see my mind is simply clouded, give me the knowledge of zen. And the zen master said, please sit down and have tea with me. And he poured tea and the tea overflowed, the cup. And it was going to overflow the saucer also. And then the professor said stop stop the it is overflowing and then the Zen master said this is the state of your mind it is overflowing with your opinions and your concepts and your biases and your prejudices and the opinions of others and the thoughts of others and what you have read for so long unless you empty your mind to a certain extent how will you understand Zen? Last class I gave you a graph, your happiness is proportional to your awareness awareness content if it is very low in your mind how will you understand spiritual knowledge or the source of happiness? That is why on an everyday basis learn on calming your mind, quieting your mind, regulating the tendencies of your mind, emptying your mind of unnecessary content which means you expose yourself also to the right things in life. By giving yourself wrong exposures you give yourself wrong content in the mind. Dekho aap jab khaate ho you choose your nutrition, your food so carefully isn't it? Through the eyes. Through the ears. It is food through the eyes, food through the ears. Shankaracharya says this. If you want pure food, you have to take good food. Which means what you see, what you hear, what you expose yourself to should be very good, good content will create good sanskars in the mind. So be careful, aaj aapke haath mein mobile phone hai, anything you can do in that, determine how what kind of a life you want, what kind of an achievement you want in your life, what do you want the direction of your life to be accordingly use these tools. Otherwise, this this tool itself can ruin you, it can put you into very negative states of mind. So, spiritual knowledge is one thing, second thing is learning to live carefully, learning to live with a lot of proper thinking that is what spiritual knowledge is meant for to regulate the thinking in your mind to give you a deep insight into the deeper aspects of life. You know recently I was reading a report in which it was given that the average American looks at his mobile phone once in every 15 minutes . Maybe not you, but some students might be doing it. You know the result of this what happens hm first of all there is the electromagnetic radiation exposure, second is this constant flitting of your attention. So, chances of ADHD, ADHD is attention deficit disorder this can become a possibility due to this level of flitting of attention. Then constantly seeing getting emotionally involved with so many objects all together at once it releases cortisol in your brain do do you know that? Effects of cortisol we will be studying. So, your brain is not meant to function with so much of you know very continuous constant input which it cannot even process, it has no time to process, no time to think correctly, just getting into you, getting into your system. So, this level of exposure you are giving yourself, this has cumulative effect over time and you know what your social media networks are? You see I am not discouraging technology, please know this. I never discourage science technology, we are never against development, development should be there, only your instruments should work under you they should not you should not be working under them you must use them to build your life to build your intelligence but do not succumb to them do not use them as tools for distraction do not allow them to rule over you and destroy your life this is what I mean. Social media networks today they are actually short term dopamine driven feedback loops constant like and dislike if you function in this mode your brain will not be able to take it after some time you go into frustration and depression you must know how to handle social media do you need this level of communication at all communication when there is something to communicate something substantial something effective something important this level of communication every five minutes fifteen minutes if you are sending out messages which have no meaning so do not indulge at this level your mind will remain in very stable states, you will see. Your mind is meant to remain very stable, very calm so that the right knowledge you are able to acquire, so that you focus on the right things in life, you lead a purposeful meaningful life. You understand, so use your tools like that, they are tools for you, nothing more. They should not become your life itself so this is one thing how in your everyday life you can remove the unhappiness of your mind another thing is in 1943 a marvelous paper was presented by an American psychologist called Abraham Maslow in a conference. The paper was called a theory of human motivation. This is to do with the hierarchy of human needs and the psychologist was Abraham Maslow. It is a very interesting thing. This is where Rahulji I need the PPT. I would like to show them that hierarchy of human needs. Did you see this? This is the hierarchy of human needs given out by Abraham Maslow. It is a pyramid. See this. Now, you observe it closely how he has created the pyramid. At the base of the pyramid are biological and physiological needs of the human being like what you need roti, kapda or makan basically. You need air, water, you need food, you need shelter all this. Then beyond this at the next rung of the pyramid is safety needs you need protection, security, law, order, stability obviously is not it. Now what happens is when the first level of needs is satisfied the mind naturally moves to the second level. Are you understanding this? When the second level is satisfied it naturally moves to the third level. What is the third level? It is belonging and love needs which means everybody needs emotional security, affection, family, relationships that is the third level of the pyramid. After this are esteem needs somewhere where your ego can positively relate help you build your personality structure you see achievement, status, responsibility, reputation all this is the fourth rung of the pyramid the fourth level. Beyond this at the apex is self actualization . Self actualization actually he meant personal growth and fulfillment where exactly do I get fulfillment what exactly does fulfillment mean? When he was asked what do you mean by self-actualization he said what a man can be he must be what a man can be he must be if you don't rise to your full potential, if you don't rise to your full stature you will not be happy. You have great potential, you have so many capacities, if they don't unfold to the maximum extent, if you don't realize your own real nature, your own divinity, you will not be happy, this is what he is saying. Vivekananda had said this very briefly, each soul is potentially divine, the goal is to manifest the divinity within. Self actualization, self fulfillment means this, finding where exactly you get complete satisfaction, rising to that stature, going, this is also like a ladder you see, one after the other you go up, finding where the real fulfillment of life lies, so this is also like a ladder you see one after the other you go up finding where the real fulfillment of life lies. So this is the hierarchy of human needs if you remain stuck at one level and try to maximize happiness there again it would not work. So you see this is the importance of understanding the hierarchy of human needs keep this picture in your mind and understand this that the mind will naturally move to the next level at some point of time you will be thinking of self actualization and self fulfillment. Iske baare mein sirf sochna nahi hai, karne ki baat hai. You will understand that it is by doing things for others that you feel more fulfilled. It is by keeping goals other than personal that you feel more fulfilled. It is by going towards self personal that you feel more fulfilled, it is by going towards self-realization that you feel more fulfilled. So this understanding will naturally come. Another thing which you can notice here which he did not mention but you can notice it here is the more you climb this rung the less you require external factors to keep you balanced and happy. As you move towards the apex of the pyramid, the happiness actually comes out of yourself, the need is fulfilled from within yourself. So, this is another important point you can understand from this pyramid. So, this is how he has given us an important model of how to proceed in life, what human needs are, what the apex need is, how to proceed hm. Yes. What happens if one of the needs in suppose I am at some level and one of the needs at the base level or level below gets taken away from me, will I be going down or will I be meet somewhere in between revolving in both the levels? Yeah, very good. You see the need for something is felt when you have invested considerable amount of yourself in that. Suppose it is a family relationship, suppose it is your job, you have invested a lot of yourself, what you call yourself just now into that, then that object or that person becomes a need, starts becoming a need for you. Now, if that person is taken away or if the job is taken away whatever it is it could be just an event whatever it is you must have the capacity to withdraw your energy back into yourself then only you remain balanced. You understand you had invested a considerable amount of your energy into that person into that event you must be able to bounce back and not actually go into depression at that stage. That's why you need subjective knowledge and idea of the subject how to control my mind. Why is it that this thing has become important for me this person has become important for me why has this relationship become important to me if I don't know myself if I don't know how my own system functions I will always be at the mercy of objects and I'm telling you they keep changing kuch bhi permanent nahi hai jeevan mein hai na, what is actually only thing permanent the fact of your existence which is what is called God you see the Atma, Atma vastu hai usi ko uska cosmic aspect Brahman God that is what is meant by God so some knowledge of this should be there within you then you will know that at any point if something changes in my life I can still bounce back I can remain stable otherwise you know the vast changes in life can drive you insane Jeevan ka tarika hi waisa hai, it will keep changing everything will keep changing everything is kshanika, in the midst of all this you have to maintain your stability your sanity your balance your ability to survive all this positively and yet contribute effectively towards society so for that you must be stable yourself first don't invest your entire everything of yours into anything without getting knowledge of yourself first a balance in our life and this is what is called maturity in life no matter what circumstances change around me I remain stable enough for that mind training is required otherwise you will succumb to everything, every change. So now once you have understood this pyramid, the next thing which we are going to go on to is the neuroscience of it. Every class this is what we will be doing. So in neuroscience, the neuroscience of unhappiness also you should know. Stress has definite neurochemical correlates in your system. You know actually speaking the amygdala portion of the brain that is supposed to be where fear is generated. That starts firing neurons whenever a fear episode is there. Cortisol, adrenaline all these are responsible for your stress in some measure. And we will be studying that also HPA axis for stress and your relaxation and response. So how does it work in your own nervous system. And also there are happy chemicals released you know whenever you are in a happy states of mind they have found neurochemicals definite neurochemicals are released you will be happy to know these chemicals meet your happy chemicals. Dopamine serotonin oxytocin endorphin but remember one thing these are neurochemicals being released in my system when I am happy. But when you are unhappy, if you give yourself a good injection of these, do not think you can become happy. This is the difference between a first person experience, a first person methodology and a third person knowledge. You understand this is the difference there's a wide chasm just by indulging in drugs or injecting these chemicals into my system I don't become happy so understand you have happiness is subjective something you have to manufacture it by yourself by training your mind by training your senses by as I told you allowing the inner joy to come out through your system. You cannot waive that and depend only on this. If you start thinking that no these things, these chemicals can give me happiness, you will actually become, what will you become? If you invest all your intelligence, actually drugs can hijack your intelligence you know, you put all your intelligence into something material, try to get your happiness out of that, you will become an addict to that and that will ruin your life. We will go into the neurophysiology of addiction, you will see how terrible, what terrible state you can reduce yourself to if you are not careful, a problem hay amongst youth so I will be going a little into that. Addiction do you know how it is defined? Wrong understanding of happiness is addiction. It is called a hedonic dysfunction. Happiness sorry addiction definition is it is a hedonic dysfunction happiness sorry addiction definition is hedonic dysfunction which means you understand happiness wrongly and it adversely affects your choices in life by your wrong understanding so if understanding is wrong you know buddhi nashat pranashyati it comes in the Gita if your understanding is wrong only God can save you nobody else so correct your understanding yes wrong understanding of happiness means you have it's an error in your thinking that happiness is coming from something where it does not lie. It is an error in your thinking. Just say I will show you in this addiction slide, I will show you how you can invest your all your thinking, your mind, your capabilities, everything into the wrong objects. We will come to that you see. Now the primary dysfunction of addiction is caused due to stress, do you know? Especially children who have suffered, it is called early childhood traumas, early age traumas, many children suffer such things and due to that there is such a stress in their brains that they succumb to pleasure constantly. The brain gets hardwired towards dopamine release and these are the people who usually become addicts. So that is why it is so very important to have a healthy childhood, have a healthy society, to be responsible in whatever we do. So how exactly this addiction works, I would like to show it to you here, you see. Neurophysiology of addiction is what we are going to study. First of all, due to addiction, what are the parts of it, it will shatter your nervous system and brain, remember addiction. These are the parts which are affected. First of all is the orbitofrontal cortex, OFC what is called. Part of your prefrontal cortex, you know that is the place where all your joys, your happiness, all this is analyzed, that starts functioning wrongly, you see what happens, it gives things value, your PFC, that valuation decides choice, this is affected in addiction, which means your valuation has gone haywire, your choices will be wrong. So understand this, how gradually it will ruin your brain and nervous system, you will you just see this. The next thing affected is anterior cingulate cortex, it is where you see yourself through the eyes of others. When this is affected you become when this fails you become socially atrocious which means you never see yourself from the eyes of others you understand socially atrocious means actually terrible there is nothing which that can control you so gradually you have to recalibrate your social cognition it's an uphill effort once you succumb to drugs or alcohol or such things it's a real uphill task to build your life it will shatter your nervous system as I'm telling you easily understand this and create the block just now never should this happen in our lives it should never come into my life create the block there are certain things in life not to be experimented with, make this very clear to your head and never go into this, no matter what episode of depression you have, what frustration you have in life, never go to this level. Look at the third thing it affects, insular cortex, this is what brings body consciousness into your system, when it is affected you are just beyond values, you never give importance to your body not to the bodies of others. Psychopaths serial killers this is this is the problem they suffer from. Then dopamine cascade within you addicts have problem assessing future risk due to this, they are constantly on drugs which are releasing dopamine. So, they remain in a drunkard kind of state and they are not able to assess any kind of risk that is why the choice they are not careful about their choices, they are not careful about their valuations, they can just go into anything. Then the last factor is epigenetics how genes give you vulnerabilities it is supposed to be responsible for how people react to drugs it takes more beer to get you drunk if you if it is not in your genes you understand the concept think over it a little and you'll understand it agar ek baar you see what you think intensely about what becomes part of your nature and your sanskar you know it leaves an impact right up to your genes ye concept Upanishad me bhi hai that is why they say that a knower of Brahman there is nobody who is born in his family who is not a knower of Brahman for seven generations. Kyun? Wo genes tak ch up to the genes, knowledge is so powerful what you make your own knowledge it will have its impact right up to the genetic level so you see you are not hardwired for suffering you can change it at any moment of time with effort, so understand here what they are telling you is it will go right up to your genes that's why I'm telling you close this aspect of negativity close it completely in your life never go into this aspect absolutely clean life is required for you to build up your character for you to go towards your higher goals in life commit yourself to higher living shuddha satvik life, if you adopt this consciously, you will see your life will be flooded with happiness and if you give in to succumb to these nonsensical things, you will ruin at least a few decades of your life, you can't bounce back so easily, so shut the gate to this completely now let us go to a few more causes for unhappiness yeh ek cheez hai aapko samajh mein aagaya, now another cause for unhappiness you see in Indian philosophy they deal with we are also going to the philosophical aspects wo kehate hain ki aap jaise neurocircuits create k philosophical aspects which means your sanskars that is going to decide your level of happiness the kind of neural circuits you form last class I showed you the connection between thought and tendency vritti and sanskar if you keep on thinking some particular things you are going to create the traits about that, the tendencies to do those things. So these are the neurocircuits actually forming in your brain. You form your neurocircuits through your thinking. So if you are able to maintain the right sanskars, think the right things, you will have very positive neurocir. Otherwise you will succumb to fear, anxiety, all kinds of negative emotions, anger, greed and you will constantly all your energy will go in solving all unnecessary problems. The energy if it is put at a certain level it can take you higher, otherwise it will keep you know whirlpooling right at these all these silly problems in your life. Too much anger you created a horrible situation then you worked at solving that situation. Too much of greed unnecessary and you ruin your life. You do not know what to aim at. So all these problems can happen due to wrong neurocircuitry, wrong sanskars. Another thing which our scriptures tell you is kleshas they are called. There are certain things which can produce unhappiness in your life look at this, this is a tree of kleshas. This comes again in the Patanjali Yogasutras. Yaha par kya kehte hain avidya jo hai, that is the root of this tree. Avidya ka matlab kya hai? you see it's a very scientific concept it means ignorance of your true nature, alienation of mind from self what I told you, you don't know who you truly are, you don't know where your happiness lies, you don't know how you are functioning that is the root of the whole problem, what does it lead to? It leads to asmita that is the klesha which identifies you immediately with your states of mind with your mind with the reflected consciousness in your mind asmi asmi a sense of I-ness not as a reflection of the true being that you are but attached to ego attached to this attached to that attached to your positions attached to your anger attached to your positions, attached to your anger, attached to your emotions, not willing to change all that, so this is how the ego functions. Asmita refers to that, clinging to something which is not actually you. The next is Raag, Raag and Dvesh, which means an attachment based on this wrong identification of yourself based on the wrong I is ka matlab ye cheez mujhe anand degi, wo cheez mujhe anand degi, you actually do not know where your happiness lies, where your balance lies, you are constantly investing your own personality in all sorts of objects around you. It leads to attachment attachment unnecessary attachment and unnecessary aversions, raag dvesh and abhinivesh which means clinging to life fear of death but you don't know what life and death means if you don't have knowledge of consciousness atman how will you know what life means what death means how will you know what life means what death means how will you know Samajh Meharai so this is these are all kleshas in Patanjali Yogasutras these bind your mind and produce very unhappy states we live under this constant fear isn't it fear there's a there's a existential fear of death there's an existential fear of being criticized of losing your position losing your status losing this losing that all based on this clashes if you study your own psychology you will see how true all this is what is the way to get out of it simple moral disciplines a little bit of austerity, some amount of self-study, tapas, swadhya, ishwar pranidhan, raising your emotions to the level of devotion to God, if all these things you can practice simple techniques, clean ways of living, commitment to truth, commitment to a sattvic way of life, simple techniques, if you practice this you will remove, you will be removed from these kleshas, they will keep their distance from you the basic problem is avidya ignorance about your true nature ignorance about how your mind is functioning so understand how the whole thing is get rid of avidya you will get rid of these kleshas one more thing important thing which you need to know here is you see the core causes of your grief, they are all subjective mainly. You see ADD attention deficit disorder, the symptoms are distraction of attention, treatment is symptomatic, tranquilizers, the actual cause is uncontrolled exposure. The cause is you and the solution that's why should be a goal oriented and focused life you see how true this is if the problem is depression the symptoms are no sustained interest in anything the treatment will be antidepressants but the actual cause for that is ego centeredness locking yourself into your little I and that's why the solution actually will be service yoga, creativity, learning something new all this. Just symptomatic cures will not work. Let us go to collective problems also like corruption say. The symptoms are exploitation at every level, the treatment given as punishment, the actual cause is selfishness and greed. You see again subjective cause, may aapko bol rahi ho na, this is the Indian way of understanding things, finding the causes for objective effects in the subject, finding subjective causes, the actual problem is selfishness and greed in human beings, how will you address that through social responsibility, go and do service, you will solve all these problems, you learn to integrate others into yourself, you see yourself in others, will develop empathy it will remove corruption from your mind. Crime deviancy in behavior the actual treatment given for this is again punishment and counseling but the cause is lust anger and pride, is not it? Ye bhi hamare andar hai, mann ke andar hote hai ye problems. You know all these are parts of your mind, you must remove it from the mind. Again service outreach activities will purify your mind, it will remove these problems from your mind. Environmental degradation, the symptoms are pollution, the treatment given is awareness, what will just being aware about environmental degradation do, the actual problem is consumerism and greed again inbuilt in the mind. This tendency to take everything for oneself, exploit nature in order to remain joyful oneself. So, again the ah remedy will be a service attitude, doing things for others will naturally bring your mind into a state of non exploitation not exploiting the environment it will stop environmental degradation. So you see the essential changes in the mind of man this is what I am telling you if you change your mind you change your states of grief you will change the unhappiness will not come into your life the next thing which you should know is how your actions lead to either good effects or bad effects and your happiness and unhappiness your action you see whenever you perform action bahot important cheez hai yeh karma jo hum kehte hai hamara karma jo hota hai, you know the common law of karma, what you sow that you reap. If you sow good things you will reap good things. If you do not sow the right stuff, what you are going to sow you are going to reap. Ek action jab aap perform karte ho, what are the effects? You see suppose you helped a friend, let us take this example, you a friend, a pehla effect external hota hai, your friend did very well in his exams this is an external first effect the second effect is aapka helpfulness, aapka kindness, the generosity which you showed created a strong positive sanskar in your mind, ye aapka gain hua, this is the second internal effect, the third effect is which you cannot see when you are in need of help, help will come to you this is called karma phal, karma shay, it's a cosmic effect which you cannot see aap poochha mat ye kaise hota hai, lekin ye hota hai, when you are in need of help, help will come to you this is the third effect of karma, so any action performed if you perform good action, good will come into your life, if your action is not good you can expect only bad to come into your life and this is the karma chakra which I have put there how action leads to sanskar, sanskar leads to the impression leads to habits, habits lead to character, your character creates your destiny. That is why sow a thought and you reap a deed, sow a deed and you reap a habit, sow a habit you reap character, sow character and you reap your destiny. Aisa mat kaho ki well fate, fate will decide how what will happen in my life, I will decide what will happen in my life through my karma, through my action, my action will be such always it will only bring benefit to others and you can be assured of getting all benefit yourself, this is the law, is a very strong moral law, one of the pillars of you can say religion, any religion will tell you this, this is how it works so this is one of another cause for your how to get happiness then one more cause for your unhappiness you see I will make you understand very briefly quickly knowing what to do but not being able to do it have you felt this situation this helpless situation I know what to do but I'm not able to do it example Mahabharat me hai, swayam Duryodhan ke jeevan me, when the Mahabharat war was going to start that time this Bhishma, Bhishma Dev he told Duryodhan I had told you you take the path of dharma and this will not happen this war you could have evaded but you did not listen to me I told you stick to dharma and then Duryodhana said Jaanaami dharmam na chame pravrttim Jaanaami adharmam na chame nivrttim I know what is dharma, I am not able to do it Mujhe pravrtti nahi hai dharma ke prati This is our problem, see it, identify it I know what is to be done, I am not able to do it I know what should not be done, I can't resist from it Duryodhana ka problem hai hamara, so how to change the state of affairs you must fix your will on what is right and good Isi umar mein, agar ismein compromise karo you will never know which direction your life will go, be strong about this you are perfectly capable of it fix your will on high values in life, fix your will on a great goal in life and move towards that, then whatever your emotion says, whatever your mind says whatever anybody's opinion says it becomes secondary, your will will take you towards your goals in life agar yeh will hi na ho, focus goal oriented life na ho, you never know where you will end up so this is the way to overcome these problems another thing is the understanding the perils of uncontrolled thought do you realize it kabhi kabhi mann mein yeh hota hai ki I just can't stop thinking and thinking is going on automatically not that you are you are thinking, this is another cause for your unhappiness you are not able to stop where to stop, Why this situation? A little meditation will help you understand your thoughts are external to your being. You can perfectly control your thoughts. If you are not able to control your thoughts, it's a perilous situation. This is one of the causes for your unhappiness. There is a very funny story regarding this. You know one man suddenly found himself under a wish fulfilling tree. And he started thinking oh I am so tired I wish I had water. And water suddenly came there. He drank the water, and I thought a good place to sit would have been very comfortable. And suddenly a throne came up there. And he got a nice place to sit. A wish-fulfilling tree, kya hai? Aapka mann hai. Then he thought, if I had some good food. And food appeared. And he had the food. Then he wanted some I had some good food and food appeared and he had the food then he wanted some entertainment, entertainment appeared, everything appeared as he wanted and then suddenly he thought what if a tiger comes now all that I'm thinking is happening suppose a tiger comes and a tiger came and gobbled him up whatever you think intensely will become a reality in your life because thought, action in its infancy is called thought. If today you don't think rightly, tomorrow how will you do things rightly? Do what is right, how will you do it? So you, perils of uncontrolled thought, your mind is that Kalpataru, so train your mind to think correctly otherwise the tiger will come in gulp you. So what is, what are Yoga Vedanta doing for you? you get analyzing your situation perfectly and they are actually giving you the testable prospect of first-person methodologies how to change yourself by understanding the ground of your consciousness the dynamics of your consciousness in the form of thoughts and emotions and how to change them how to regulate them how to keep them under your control and the unfoldment of consciousness at different levels of your personality. This is what first person methodology, testable concept, this is what they are giving you. If you change the subject, you get power over the object. I told you in a last class, change the subject, you will see, you will be in charge of the situation, any situation. So you can change the subject you will see you will be in charge of the situation, any situation. So you can change it as you wish. If you have not researched into the subject, this portion is sort of cut out of your life. You are at the mercy of every object, every person, everybody's emotion, this and that. Your life will just pass by you. You won't realize kya ho raha hai. So this is how subjective knowledge actually helps you. So today we discussed some very important points. I will quickly summarize if you have questions ask me at this point. Do you have questions based on what we discussed? Let me summarize it for you. First of all we discussed the who you are actually how the Upanishad points out to the reality of yourself by analyzing the three states of your own existence since you are giving data about the three states you are apart from the three states you are the Atman who was the witness of the waking state that's why you have a record of the data of the waking state you are the witness of the dream state that's why you know what you dreamt and you are also the witness of the deep sleep state because you say you slept happily and there was there's no there was no experience in that state of there was no experience of any object so since you have been able to give this data you are apart from the three states you are the Atman which pass through these three states or you can say the states passed over you, you are apart you are neither the waker nor the dreamer nor the deep sleeper you are always the witness of the states of your mind you are the witness of the states of your mind you are not at the mercy of the states of your mind nor at the mercy of the states of somebody's mind and the second important idea which this Upanishad gave you was the source of your happiness is right within yourself because even when the mind was shut down you declared your happiness you declared your sense of peace and restfulness so you are that source tap your knowledge, your consciousness, your freedom, your happiness right from within yourself Vivekananda always used to say that everything exists right within you, you can do anything and everything, call upon the sleeping soul and see how it awakens knowledge will come, goodness will come, purity will come everything that is excellent will come once the soul is aroused to self-conscious activity agar ye atma jnan na ho, to really you are at the mercy of your mind and the mercy of objects around you so this is one important thing which we learned then we learned every object which is dear to you it is dear because of the presence of consciousness so actually what do you love you love consciousness, you actually only love God that is their way of putting it. Wherever there is the manifestation of consciousness, greater and greater consciousness, you will start loving that. Whatever that situation, that being, that person, that quality, you will start loving it. So this is one of the very important equation of love, please understand this, where there is consciousness there will be love, then you saw you understood how if the mind is not trained to go towards this self, you lose a huge chunk of happiness in your life, if it has no knowledge of this self, if it is alienated from this knowledge, you have this tendency to become to move towards negativities the lesser the awareness the more the confusion of the mind will prevail the more the awareness the lesser the confusion will be in the mind happiness is proportional to awareness you saw that in the graph also so alienation of mind from self at least aap me nahi hona chahiye jo yog vedanta me penetrate karne ki koshish kar rahe ho. Then you learn the causes normal causes for your unhappiness what are the main causes due to wrong management of mind the powers of your mind you invested it in your things which you need not have given attention to so it led to attention deficit you did not know how to control your will that is why it led to just just life going by that is all and you did not mind it then avidya that is kleshas existing in your mind this is one of the main causes for unhappiness not understanding your real nature is the cause for unhappiness wrong karma bad actions are causes for unhappiness not being able to control your own thought process the perils of uncontrolled thought this is one of the main causes of your unhappiness knowing what to do and not being able to do it this is another major cause for your unhappiness so what does all this show can you tell me everything is in your hands you are the creator of your own destiny if you train your mind if you know if you use atma vidya you will get atma, you will know how to handle your own faculties. If this training has not occurred, do not think you can do anything with objects around you. It is not possible. If the instrument is not trained, the instrument of your perception, the instrument of interaction is not trained, do not think you will get the results you want. So isiliye ye vidya itni important hai. get the results you want. So, the more you invest in self-knowledge, remember this self-knowledge is not a matter of choice. I can do it, they fall into trouble without knowing it. They will not know the cause for the trouble, they will not be able to identify the solution to the trouble. So, understand at this very level the importance of this knowledge. If you can get this knowledge into your hands, you are in control charge of your faculties . You will be successful. This is the secret of success because the subject is interacting with the object always, isn't it? In the objective world, kya ho raha hai? The subject is interacting with the object. Knowledge of the subject will give you power over the object, power to change situations around you, power to take the right decisions, power to function towards higher ideals, power to influence and change others around you. Without this knowledge, this this major aspect will be lacking in your life. Isi liye do not take this as a matter of choice. Aaj class mein padh rahe hain, sun ke rakhe hain ge, aisa nahi, thoda is par kaam karna hain. Jo aapko assignments de jayenge usko kije, submit your reports, stay on the right track and some amount of this Atma Vidya, try to bring it into your life through meditation, you see one of your assignments is meditation, are you doing it? Yes, don't leave it out, it will bring your thought process under control it will distance you from your thought, so it is a big gain in your life, small techniques have been given, we have actually thought over these techniques and then it has been given to you, so apply your mind to it, application of mind is most important, it will change your sanskars, change your nature, you will get the gain after many months, years, you see all long lasting happiness is like that, it is not immediate but you will understand its effect on you after sometime and you will thank this knowledge. So today's session we will end here. Have you any questions on this? Yes. Going back to the example of the sleep, there are instances when we actually feel that I slept just now and I just woke up. So in that case, what happens is that we are not able to sleep. So we are not able to sleep. So we are not able to sleep. So we are not able to sleep. So we are not able to sleep. So we are not able to sleep. So we are not able to sleep. So we are not able to sleep. So we are not able to sleep. Going back to the example of sleep, there are instances when we feel that I slept just now and I just woke up So in that case does the atman also relax? You see it's a good question she has asked. In sleep, time, space and causation are inbuilt in your mind Because the mind has shut down, you lose the sense of time in sleep aap jab sote ho, do gante soye ho yaa chaar gante soye ho yaa six hours soye ho aapko pata nahi chalta isn't it, you do not know, you have to get up and see the alarm clock in order to know how long you have slept you have gone beyond time, why your mind has shut down, time, space and causation are inbuilt parameters in your mind So now what she is asking is what exactly happens to the Atman, the Atman is of the nature of pure consciousness or awareness that is always awake, always present, always shining, you are that, you are functioning through the mind that is the equipment given for you to function, when that shut down that is why the sense of haziness you do not know you didn't experience anything you say you say in deep sleep you didn't experience any object because the instrument of perception has shut down but awareness is always there because you recorded that you did not experience any object who recorded that? How deep point is this? Think about it. It is happening in your life everyday. The fact that you did not encounter any object in deep sleep, who recorded that fact? You were present to see the mind functioning, you were present to see the mind stop functioning, the mind shut down you were present as the Atman, as awareness Abhi aapko pata nahi chal raha, but you were present I did not realize that 8 hours passed but I actually felt that it was just an hour or something Very good, you are the sakshi of everything, this is the definition of the atman, the rest of you continues, you know what are you? You are body plus mind plus atman, hai na? Well to understand in this way you are a combination of all of this Now death is nothing but the separation of what is called the sukshma sharit, the mind and consciousness from your physical body separation, so the body falls the rest of you continues, aapke jo impressions hai, sanskaars hai, habits hai, everything is going to continue isiliye suicide is never a solution to solving life's problems, please understand this mujhe bahut dukh hua ye sunke ki yaha bhi suicides hote hain How can you think that ending your body will end your problem? The problem is in your mind, first of all localize the problem, see where it is Your mind continues even after death, remember this, sookshma sharid ka matlab hai mind Mind and consciousness that continues even if the body falls So you actually you are continuing Sirf sharir jaise you know bhagwat gita mein bahut sundar illustration hai Vasaansi jeernaani yatha vihaaya, navaani grinaani naroparani As you change clothes so you change bodies You are never just the body, you are wearing a body as you are wearing a piece of cloth, you are animating the body from within and you are identifying with the body and calling it me but you are always separate from the body, you are the Sakshi of the states of your mind, of the body, of the world of objects so what happens in death is just the real you, the mind and the consciousness gets separated from the physical body, the physical body falls so sleep, deep sleep is different from death Yes, consciousness gets reflected in your mind and so you get the sense of I its reflected awareness in the mind, oh conscience, conscience is the sense of right and wrong which is inbuilt in your mind that is what you call conscience it functions again due to the light of awareness coming from the Atman, the sense of right and wrong according to your sanskars you see your sense of right and wrong your valuation it is inbuilt according to your sanskars in your mind samajh mein aaya hai, its a kind of relative concept but don't think well there is only one absolute thing which is consciousness the rest is relative compared to that but you must have a deep sense of right and wrong so that you make the right choices in life wo jo wo choice karta hai usi ko consciencehte hain, you do something wrong your conscience will prick isn't it, so you regulate your working of your conscience through your sanskars aapke sanskar jaise bane hain accordingly your conscience will tell you this is the right thing to do this is the wrong thing to do, now all this gets affected when you go into negativities like drug addiction and all this alcohol, drug addiction, it affects your brain in such a way even the conscience is blocked out so the sense of right and wrong goes out So be careful about this, build all this in your life consciously The whole thing is apne life jeevan ko apne haathon me le na hai, hai na this freedom this independence you must manufacture that is the purpose of courses like this, apne jeevan ko apne haathon me le na hai apne decisions ko apne haathon me le na hai, work on yourself, work on your mind and you will be able to do this When you showed that this addiction causes changes in orbital frontal cortex, interior cingulate cortex and insular cortex it could be the other way around also that someone because of certain kind of as you told certain kind of childhood trauma or could be a real trauma to the brain that these structural changes do occur per se and those structural changes are responsible for those neurochemical changes may be deficit or excess and leads to the addiction, right, that is also a possibility Neurophysiologically speaking it is due to addiction that those changes have taken place. First the habit, you see what starts first? Is it the habit that starts first or the changes in your brain that start first? Are the changes due to the habit or is the habit due to the changes? This is what you are asking. Isn't it? Is it the brain or the addiction? What we discussed, we got that, so it is an addiction which is causing a seizing behavior and then that will not reach a cycle. So now I am taking the other way round and saying that if there are structural changes to the brain, how can structural changes happen by themselves? So as those childhood traumas or mental trauma, so the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma, so the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not able to handle the mental trauma. So the brain is not, one minute, how can structural changes happen by themselves? So as those childhood traumas or may be an actual trauma to the brain those could be the reasons where such changes along with other changes may happen to the brain? No, neurophysiologically it has been found, they have tracked and fMRI scans of the brain they have taken that these kind of changes which I showed you have happened due to addictions. Other changes might have been produced due to traumas or phobias or whatever. It can be produced in the brain. You see every strong sanskar is changing your neurochemistry, it is changing your neural connections, it is making some changes in your brain the point for us to observe is consciously where I can take control changes to horay due to addictions vast changes occur in your brain and due to all kinds of experiences like traumatic experience as he says changes can occur in the brain how many can I take conscious control of the situation? That is the point we should learn. You understand how not to succumb to addictions, how to be able to bounce back even if negative experiences occur, how to take charge of my, how do you take charge of your brain? As he said the neural connections whatever is happening how do you take charge of that through your mind, through the thoughts in your mind, through your attitudes, through your response and reaction to any particular situation . There will be only positive changes in your brain . Neurophysiologically they have tracked the effects of positive emotions, positive attitudes in the mind through fMRI scans and they have ah I can tell you a wonderful experiment ah you know they studied the brains of Tibetan monks who are given to a lot of meditation and the the experiment was they asked them to meditate on something like kindness. A thought of kindness coming into their mind after every day when they were meditating like this a number of electrodes were fixed and fMRI scans were taken and you know they found that neuroplasticity geomketasticity which means structure of brain changing due to experience that was very positive in these monks. There was absolutely no frustration, depression, no negative emotion, deep level empathy. You see just by mind activity in the in their mind they have thought of kindness, they have thought of empathy thus nature of the brain has changed. Neuroplasticity has naturally occurred in a very positive way and they do not suffer from any negativity. So, you change your brain through your mind, through your thoughts, what thoughts you think is in your hands. So, you see subjective first person methodology that is why it is so important. I can make the change, the third person report will correlate, you can correlate it with the third person report, but you make the essential changes within yourself. Isili aapke jeevan ko aapke haathon me le na hai. Okay? That is the essential thing. Shall we stop here? That is the essential thing. Shall we stop here?
 Thank you very much. In We will start from where we left off in the last class. So we were studying happiness, the different dimensions of happiness, the different levels of happiness and how we are going to understand happiness philosophically, psychologically, neurophysiologically through neuroscience and also through yoga and Vedanta. This is how we have taken up the study of the science of happiness. Now here let me tell you if you study it philosophically, different philosophers have given, this is a major philosophical issue, philosophical question, what exactly constitutes happiness, just like how there are other questions, what is life, what is death and what is the human personality about, what is justice, just like that, what is happiness, is a major philosophical query and different philosophers have given different explanations for this, starting from Aristotle's time. He used to say that happiness is a question of choice. If you make the right choices, you will be happy. But at the same time, he understood that human nature, it's not so easy to make the right choice, because human nature has a rational aspect, it has a sensual aspect, it has so many aspects, so many facades. But anyway, he used to say that happiness is a matter of choice, and you can make the right choice. Plato, in his own way way said that happiness is something innate and if you bring in the right mental state, you will be happy. Like this, different philosophers have given very different views. You know, Bentham and Mill, they used to say that happiness has to do with hedonism, pleasure theory. And so the natural philosophy that they bent towards was utilitarianism. Everything depends on how you can utilize it. And then, of course, you have psychologists like Freud and Jung. These people also have given out their views on happiness. Freud, like for example, believed that happiness is giving vent to your feelings and instincts and everything, and in fact civilization actually suppresses happiness. So even these type of views are there. Jung on his side would say that happiness has to do with, more to do with mind management, the mental state, and it has to do with relationships, establishing good human relationships, it has to do with mental health. So these are also views. So every philosopher has given his own ideas, his own thinking. When you come to yoga and Vedanta, you know how our philosophies were created, yoga and Vedanta, they were the people who created them Philosophy itself is called Darshan in India What does Darshan mean? It's an insight into a truth It's a window, an opening into truth and these philosophers were not armchair philosophers you know, sitting and thinking. You know armchair philosophy? If you sit where you are sitting and start thinking that is armchair philosophy. You can think out many things, thought experiments are there. But if you practice yoga, if you do some form of meditation and then observe the thinking in your mind, you will see there is a vast change in your thought level. When you still the mind, you control the mind, you allow it to flow in a particular way, you concentrate on something elevating and then watch your thought. You will see the nature of that thought, the texture of that thought, the quality of that thought changes. So philosophy, Indian philosophies, yoga and Vedanta were especially born of meditative thought. That's why they are darshanas insights into a reality every philosophy we call as shat darshan there are six systems of philosophy if you track the founder of every system you will see he was either a rishi or a yogi he was a man of meditation so when you train your mind like this it's to do with training of mind and then start thinking your thought experiment will be quite different. Do you understand? The difference between just thinking just now if you start thinking so many things can come into your mind so many thought forms can come into your mind still your mind for some time and then watch your thoughts you will see the nature of that thought will change. Its conviction-producing capacity would have changed. Its ideation and mentation is different. You understand? Its conclusions will be different. Easily, we use meditation as a tool to improve the quality of our thought. If you improve the quality of your thought, you improve the quality of your life. Isn't it? So this is how meditation can be used as a very powerful tool to help you form better philosophies, to help you understand the very depths of your psychology. And this is what they have tried to do in yoga and Vedanta. What they have arrived at. Up they go, this happiness which we are discussing you know their view of happiness it was something very really very amazing the picture which Vedanta gives you of happiness is it is inbuilt right within you right now it is your very nature then what is getting happiness about it is so enabling your body-mind complex to express that inner happy nature it is just a training of your body-mind complex this is what Vedanta will tell you the source of happiness is right within you, we were talking about Atma Vidya in the last class do you remember existential awareness we were trying to see what it is. We were trying to dwell on that. That is the very source of your happiness. It is the Atman within you, according to Vedanta. That is the source of consciousness. That is the source of happiness. That is the source of all power. That is the source of all strength. That is your very existence itself. If you tap into that source and so enable the body and mind that it can bring out that happiness, you will feel happy because there is a source of consciousness, your mind is becoming conscious. Last time I showed you the model of Panchakosha, because the source of your consciousness is within you, your mind becomes conscious by coming into touch with that source. The body becomes conscious, enlivened, by coming into touch with that source. So the source of all of this is right within you. So this is a really amazing idea. It's a very powerful idea. If you can tap into that source, you will always be happy. Whether you have the right objects around you or not, whether you have the right situation and circumstance around you or not, you will always be happy. You see, this is the remarkable thing about Indian philosophy. Understanding the subject, tapping the powers of the subject, going deep within. If you are able to understand the subject well, if you are able to understand your own nature properly you will get control over the object, you will understand the true nature of the object, if you have no knowledge of the subject, objective knowledge becomes very difficult because every object is an object in your awareness, that is why some idea of who you are, how you are, what you are made up of, how you function is very important in order to develop any substantial deep level philosophy of life. Do you get this point? Whatever I'm telling you, try to internalize it, try to think about it originally by yourself. A knowledge of yourself is the basic starting point to understanding the world better, to handling the world better and to handling objective knowledge better and better. You will do better science if you have a solid understanding of yourself. Isn't this true? How does your mind exactly work? If you understand that you will be able to do your own science even better without the stress and strain. Handling your own system much better. So this is how they have penetrated into this science. And what is the exact conclusion they come to? You see let me give it to you in the form of a very beautiful story. It is not a story actually, it is called Ekashloki. It is given by Shankaracharya. It is a small shloka. I will translate it into English for you. It will help you see how they are penetrating into the subject, why they are telling you that the source of your happiness is right within you, how they are telling it. You see, the basic question in this Ekashloki which Shankaracharya puts, you answer this question you are quite capable of it. See I will tell you the question is by what light do you see he says, ap objects dekh rahe ho around you by what light are you seeing them, give me your answer. Yes he has given a good answer, a subjective answer but preliminary first you are seeing it by when you go outside you are seeing it by sunlight or here you are seeing it by electric light. Isn't it? That's an aid to your eye. Then he asks, okay, you are seeing the sun by day and the moon by night, but by what light do you see these, the sun and the moon? By what light do you see? Eyes. By the light of your eyes by what light do you see your eyes? Think and tell me very good you are seeing your eyes through your mind and you are seeing your mind through your consciousness. You have awareness that's why you can study your mind you are able to objectively study your mind because there is awareness shining in your mind, behind your mind. Isn't this true? So you see you are being led to the subject, the supreme subject right within you. Any objective knowledge can be had even better, studied even better if you are clear about the subject. Who is studying what? This is called Drig Drishya Vivek you can penetrate deeper and deeper into your own inner levels and understand who is the subject who is trying to understand the object a similar thing is being said in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, you will also give the answer to this yourself, I am quite confident in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, you will also give the answer to this question. I am quite confident. In Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, there is a conversation between Janak Raja, Janak Raja was a Raja Rishi, right? and Yajnavalkya Muni, he was a Brahma Rishi, Brahma Jnani. So there is a conversation between the two of them. In which Janak asks Yajnavalkya, What serves as light for man? tell me what serves as light for you? in what light do you see objects? same question which I asked earlier you see it primarily by sunlight ok, in those days there was no electric light so the answer was sunlight Yajnavalkya Muni said sunlight, I see everything sunlight. In the absence of sunlight, what is the light you use? Tell me. Very good. Some other form. He first said moonlight, then he again asked, in the absence of moonlight, what is it? He said fire. In the absence of fire, what is the light you use to see objects? Think and tell me. You are equal to Yajnavalkya, he said consciousness. Try to understand this, in the absence of fire, how do you make your way through objects? Yajnavalkya Muni said speech. I can know things by touching and by speech In the absence of touch and speech how will you know? He said consciousness The self So you are understanding how the subject is working actually Because you yourself are giving me the answers Because there is consciousness behind the mind The mind becomes conscious Through that mind you are perceiving this world of objects Through your senses You understand? This is how the subject is understanding the objective world At the heart of it all is the self Consciousness itself Which you are That is your definition, that is your real identity if you don't have any knowledge about this in your mind you will just you will be all objective and you will not be able to understand how exactly you are perceiving whether you are perceiving your objective knowledge understanding your objective knowledge correctly or not start with the subject the subject is what is understanding the object. There is a connection between the two, very strong connection, always. In the subject you are perceiving the object. Through the subject you are perceiving the object. So this is how gradually they are leading you to this. You will ask me a point blank question. Many times in our Sunday classes that happens. You see, what is this consciousness that you are talking of? Yeh consciousness kya cheez hai? Jiski wajah se my mind is enlivened, my mind starts becoming conscious and functioning due to which my senses understand objects all around me and I perceive the objective world. What is the heart of this whole story? Consciousness. So let us start with this enquiry. What is this basic spiritual source of the human personality structure? What is consciousness? If you put this question, you see the answer is very simple. It requires a subtle intellect to understand this. Because you yourself are that. Just now you told me how consciousness is the source of all perception. Consciousness is something in whose awareness everything is occurring. Isn't it? In whose ambit everything is occurring. So I cannot give an objective definition of consciousness. I cannot say consciousness is this and that. This is called consciousness. Can I give you such a definition? I can't give you. That awareness in which everything else functions, that is consciousness. If you are aware of it, it is not consciousness. Because there is consciousness, there is awareness of everything else through which you function. In Kena Upanishad, you are able to understand what I am saying, think about it deeply and it will become very clear. In Kena Upanishad, there is a very beautiful definition, a very wonderful definition of what consciousness means. Let me just give you a few of the mantras here.                                                                                                            that due to which your eyes function but which cannot be seen by the eyes that is consciousness that is Brahman the supreme reality and not this which people worship objectively you see we worship God's objectively isn't it it is because we are not able to see this real nature just now we are also functioning objectively so we need an objective aspect of God to proceed further. But the real nature of Brahman or the supreme reality is consciousness itself which you yourself are. The Atman within you is that. So this is what he is saying. yad shrotrena na shrunoti ye na shrotram idam shrutam tadeva brahmatvam viddhi nedam yadidam upasate The meaning is again the same That which the ears cannot hear But due to which the ears are hearing Are you able to understand this? Isn't this quite obvious? Because consciousness is shining behind your mind The area of your brain which is the center for functioning of the ear, that area is enlivened because there is consciousness behind the mind. You understand? And that is how your ear is actually enabled to hear. That is how you are able to hear. So that due to which you are enabled to hear, you are able to hear but that which cannot lead to the even the notion, the understanding of consciousness, your senses cannot lead to that, that is Brahman he is saying and not this that people objectively worship. yan manasa namanute yenahur mano matam tadeva brahmatvam vidhi nedam yadidam upasate Again the meaning is the same, that due to which your mind functions but which the mind cannot reveal Isn't it? If you think mentally then can you go to consciousness? By just mentally thinking about it? It is behind your mind. It is that which is making the mind conscious Now you have answered that consciousness is the source factor so then the definition of consciousness is that which very early enlivens the mind but which cannot be tracked by the mind, this ordinary kind of mind the ordinarily functioning mind which is quite distracted this kind of mind cannot go to that source so that is Brahman through which the mind functions but which the mind cannot reveal So you see how beautiful the definitions of the supreme reality, what we are calling consciousness is there So Vedanta is very clear about what the reality of you is Don't take it as a third person model to study separately Apply it to your own self last class I told you if you can track existential awareness right within yourself by stopping the commotion in your mind the intense thought activity in your mind if you can feel awareness in your mind itself that is the most powerful clue you can use to go to this source of awareness which is also the source of joy It is the source of bliss This is what the Upanishads tell you again and again That this Atmavastu is called Satchidananda You must have heard of it Sat, it is existence itself Not that it is existing It is existence itself It is consciousness itself, not that it becomes conscious, it is the very source of consciousness and it is bliss itself, not that it is happy, it is happiness itself, this is its definition and this is you, this is your real nature, this source of all happiness bliss and consciousness is functioning through this body-mind complex that is why you feel the sense of life aliveness conscious you feel conscious you feel enlivened and you feel capable of everything the source factor is that Atman so this yoga Vedanta philosophy is directly pointing pointing you towards your real nature you can discover it by yourself, it is a self discovery procedure there is no belief system in this it's not a question of you believe this or you don't believe this you find out for yourself, if you don't believe even better you will actually use your intellect to originally go towards the source. So this is the kind of technique that is adopted to show you the source of your very awareness, the source of your joy, happiness. So this is the stand which yoga and Vedanta are taking. Yoga will actually train you how to go towards that source of joy. By yoga I don't mean the physical exercises please get this clear i will be using this terminology again and again by yoga i mean the actual act of meditation which is called nididhyasana in vedanta if you can study nididhyasana through yoga psychology it's a very powerful thing because in yoga psychology many concepts are clear it and actually the technique which you are using to go towards the self, self knowledge is Nididhyasana, meditation. So in a way you can combine the two and you will get vast knowledge of what is happening in your mind and how it can take you back to the source which is you, consciousness, pure consciousness which is your very definition so any problem in the mind you can use yoga psychology any existential problem immediately you can use Vedanta you understand they are very powerful systems of thought, you have to use them like this, it is written in a book I keep the book at a pedestal and worship it and I don't know what is the matter written in it this is the way we have been using these scriptures so far. But now you must understand this, it is a practical manual for better living, for better understanding, better working and it is actually dealing with you. Isn't it? This is not dealing with matter and energy or black matter. It's not dealing with anything of that. It's not dealing with black holes. It is dealing with, not with any material aspect, it's dealing with your own consciousness. Isn't it? So, won't you be interested in it? This is the most interesting subject. That is why I told you it's a science in itself. This is how you have to study it, science in itself you have to study it like this, you have to take it like this and if you are able to apply this penetrate into this your mind will function much better remember this, to penetrate into this knowledge, what is the result of it it is not running away from this and that you cannot run away anywhere practically speaking, because your world is in your mind and your mind is lodged in yourself. So you will utilize this knowledge only to better your mind and to better your experience of life, to understand life better. Get the most out of life, get the best experiences out of life. That is what this knowledge is meant for and that is why we will study it only as a science As I told you Now here, I would like to go deep into Yoga Psychology Because these are the concepts which you will practically be using How my thoughts function How my Sanskars are formed How my Sanskars are formed by thoughts And how my habits are created? You see this is the major problem with young people They are not able to handle their own minds And they do not know Well how to change their habits Some habits have been created At a young age, it's going on even now Now I am not able to change them You know there is a very beautiful story It's a Zen story, which says, there was one man who was coming down a road into a town and he was galloping on a horse, he was coming on a very fast horse. So all the town folk were looking at how he is coming at such a pace, itni zor se aara hai, so they were all seeing kahaan se aara hai, kahaan jaa ra hai, so immediately he entered into the town. And they stopped the horse and he said Well, why did you stop my horse? And they asked, where are you going? And he said, I don't know you asked the horse. I am not able to get off the horse. Habit, you are riding the horse of habit. Aap kahan jaa raha ho aap koi pata nah you are going as a result. If you do not have some level of control over your mind, and your habits, and your sanskars, you will really not know where you are going. Look at your everyday questions, Why don't you get up in the morning? Why don't you get concentration in your studies? Your everyday questions, you are riding the horse of habit. If you can bring the whole thing into your hands, won't you achieve success anywhere? Tell me, if your mind was in your hands. So this is how we will be studying Yoga Psychology. Practically how you can use these concepts and discover the higher dimensions of your own being. If you get established in Yoga Vedanta is only a matter of time It will just unfold before you You will understand the greatest truths of life naturally But if your mind is not under your control Then all this will appear like theory to you Right? It will appear like some scriptural theory I cannot connect with it So this is actually a practical manual to help you work on your own mind. To better your own mind. You have to take it like this. And this is how yoga psychology will help you. Let me go into some of the basic facts which you need to know about your own mind. Just now if you watch your mind, you know what is happening? For 2 seconds, close your eyes. See what is happening watch your mind, you know what is happening? Close your eyes for a second or two See what is happening in your mind So many thoughts and so many ideas And so many things popping up All at once Open your eyes, you see now So many things are going on in your mind What is your thoughts, your present impulses, your emotions, they are result of what? they are result of your past habits, past conditioning, your exposures, whatever you have seen and done throughout today, your actions, the result of all of that is your mental activity, isn't it? This is what is happening in your mind. So, here you have to understand some basic concepts on how to handle mind. Our mind is deeply conditioned. Do you know what is the meaning of conditioned? Can you tell me what conditioning means? Pardon? No, no, no. Yes, conditioned means already the grooves are made, already your energy is going through particular pathways, you have already conditioned yourself to function in a particular way, it means when you think of a thought, what happens in your brain, you create a neural pathway, and next time that thought will become easier for you because your energy will tend to flow only through that neural pathway. This is called conditioning. You associate things in such a way that you create definite neural pathways. You understand? I'm combining neuroscience and yoga psychology to help you understand things scientifically. Conditioning means learning to associate things and concepts in such a way that your energy flows in a particular way. So this is how we condition ourselves into compulsive thinking I will show you a simple example of conditioning here see understanding conditioning this is happening in your mind right now at any given moment of time you are working with a lot of conditioning it leads to compulsive thinking you see what happens this is a simple experiment which you must have studied in school Pavlov's experiment of conditioning This is a simple experiment which you must have read in your school. Pavlov's Experiment of Conditioning. This is a famous example of classical conditioning. See, if you bring a bone before a dog, what happens? It starts salivating. Now what the experiment is, Pavlov, what he did was, he started ringing a bell before the dog and there was no salivation initially then he started ringing the bell along with the bone and salivation started then when he only rang the bell salivation was going on what has the dog done it has associated the bell with the bone do you understand? so when he starts ringing the bell immediately the bone. So much may arise. So when he starts ringing the bell, immediately the dog started salivating. It has associated the bone with the bell. This is how we learn to associate and connect concepts. And your actually conditioning means response to a stimulus in a specific, very particular way. So that becomes naturally, it becomes your natural nature due to this conditioning. Immediately there'll be one particular response only to one particular stimulus because of your conditioning. So now see, if you don't condition yourself rightly, if you don't make the right associations, you will be suffering from all kinds of negative neural pathways. So much matter you have made the wrong connections in your you will be suffering from all kinds of negative neural pathways you have made the wrong connections in your mind and that is why you are not able to see things clearly you are not able to think clearly you have negative emotions in your mind anger, seeing a person makes you very angry you can't relate with him, you can't connect with him what is the reason for this? at some point of time maybe he told you something which you did not like you did classical conditioning of him you associated the anger with the word with the person so anytime you see the person you turn your face away in this very class if I praise you for your question you will start liking the class if I do not appreciate your question, you will feel class was boring Classical conditioning, I want you to understand this Why? Take the example of dogs You know just school children also behave like this When the school bell rings, at once the excitement starts Why? Classical conditioning is done. Bell with food. Children always, you know, they walk to school but they run back home. It's a universal phenomenon. They have associated bell with freedom. When the final bell rings at the end of... You have also done this in school days. At the end of the day when the bell rings, you rush back home. It's a period of great joy joy you have associated the bell with freedom so classical conditioning is formed like this this is a simple example which I am giving you you have made complex classical conditioning in various ways in your brain so your neural pathways are already formed in that way and your energies, your thoughts tend to flow accordingly now to get an idea of real joy, to understand real joy bliss, happiness, you must learn to decondition yourself from the negative pathways are you getting it? if you are able to do that, your energy will flow why can't we always stay in the same mood? isn't this a common problem? your anxiety, your stress it is all to do with negative emotions you are not able to maintain the same mood all the time because you have conditioned yourself in a particular way you have conditioned yourself into negative neural pathways so deconditioning is the remedy how is deconditioning done, I have written it there just see this entire thing Deconditioning occurs when you separate stimulus and response through discrimination In your mind you must be able to separate the two Why is my emotion behaving this way? Why is my thought behaving in this way? Why have I made the wrong associations? And practically it means, here in this example it means putting a distance between the bell and the bone. If you are able to do that, it means you don't ring the two of them together. You don't ring the bell when the bone is given. You separate them in time and space. And what will happen is your brain will not create that particular pathway. It will not associate the bone with the bell. So how does it work in your practical life? Whenever there is anger in your mind, when there is anxiety in your mind, it is because of some wrong association you have done with something in the past or with somebody or somebody's comment or with feedback, negative feedback you received from somewhere, isn't this true? How will you change it? Classical conditioning has occurred now in the brain, how will you change it? You will disconnect the concept from the person, somebody, maybe your teachers scolded you for some particular mistake you have made, you have associated anxiety and stress with the teacher, You will disconnect this That rebuke was important for me to change my ways It has nothing to do with the teacher Understood? So you will start enjoying that class You will start enjoying whatever the teacher has to say This way you decondition yourself by yourself If you understand the process of conditioning You will be able to decondition yourself by yourself. If you understand the process of conditioning, you will be able to decondition yourself. If you do not understand the process of conditioning, it will be difficult for you to decondition yourself. Because you will not be able to understand what is happening in your mind. Do you understand? Any strong emotion, any strong negative thought, you must become aware. These are the things which actually remove your energy which do not give you the power to concentrate on your studies. You understand emotional intelligence is very important for you to know. IQ you already have EQ emotional intelligence that factor should be high Isko samajhna isiliye zaruri hai that you are able to handle your emotions It is important to understand this for all this if your emotional inner emotional life is balanced if emotionally intelligence persists in you if you understand how your mind is working otherwise for every little thing one little comment and you can succumb to it so this will be disastrous if this is the situation so remember you're handling the subject I told you handling your own own mind and keeping it positive will keep you happy all the time will keep you glad This is basic even to function efficiently. This is basic so achi tarah se samajh lo Remember if you cannot handle your emotions, you cannot handle your thoughts emotional force is most powerful in you Rational thinking is a bit of you maybe, a large part of your personality is involved in your emotions. The power of emotion is such, you know what is emotion is? Emotion is a vast amount of vital energy invested into a thought and the power of that emotion is such, it can simply blow away your intelligence and will at any point of time So your emotions must be under your control They must be refined, they must function at a particular level And then you will be able to handle any situation You will not have any negativity in your life You will not be prone to anger, you will not be prone to Frustration Anything goes wrong in your life you will not go into depression otherwise all these things can actually capture your mind completely you know this inner resistance towards negativity towards suffering this will go out of your life because awareness has come to take charge of your to take charge of the subject to take charge of your mind by yourself an equation of suffering I would like to give you here this is an important equation for you want to for you to understand shall I write it right here you see suffering okay let me write it in an empty sheet, because suffering S, this second equation here, S is equal to P into R, important equation here for you to know, where S is equal to suffering, P is equal to pain and R is equal to the resistance in your mind. The important thing for you to know here is suffering is a result of pain times your resistance. If R is equal to 0, S will be 0, even if pain is there, even if P is there. Isn't this true? If you have learned to handle your own mind, even if some form of pain comes into your life, your suffering will be 0. You don't succumb to the outer situation, to the outer circumstance. If your inner resistance is not there, if the mind is clean enough, if the mind is able to balance itself, if the mind is very stable, you understand? Otherwise only the mind is itself resisting any little form of suffering, pain coming into your life, it will result in tremendous suffering. Yeh hota hai ke nahi? One little word can ruin your day. If you have any form of suffering coming, pain coming into your life, it will result in tremendous suffering. Is it possible or not? One little word can ruin your day. One little act unintentionally done, can for weeks together you are brooding over it. Frustration, depression, suffering, don't let it allow you to, let it not dominate your mind. Let it not find any place in your mind. For this you must maintain any place in your mind for this you must maintain this clarity in your thinking clarity of emotion maintain it at a particular level and you see how perfectly this equation works your inner resistance is gone, your mind is so clear you are able to handle the situation negativity coming from somebody also you are able to handle it you don't give a negative response to it otherwise one little word and your hand anger you batter the person with your words and the thing only grows the issue grows today they know keba you will go into depression and then you will be asking what is the solution to this what is the solution to that so keep your mind clear Just to understand, when you gave the example of Pavlov's dog, so if the dog had the same brain that we did, then he would be able to say that the bell is not the bone, and that is how he will separate the bone from the bell, and not salivate with the bell. So if with the same example, if somebody gives me a negative feedback, Yes. and calls me a stupid person. Yes. Okay, so I feel bad because it's not the words that are important, but the feeling that it has generated in me of a low self-esteem. Yes. So the reason for my suffering is not the words, the... Yes. ...feeling of low self-esteem... Generated. ...from what is being. Yes. So if I remove that feeling from my mind... Yes. ...then the words will have no effect. Is that what you are trying to say? Yes. What I am trying to say is if your mind is in a stable state, it will see for the... ...whatever word has come in, it will see it for what it is and it will change itself if required. It will not react negatively immediately to that word if you do not react immediately it will not generate suffering in you the inner resistance has gone maybe the word was put in there your teacher may be put in a word so that you correct yourself you can generate enormous amount of suffering out of it or you can just correct yourself and remain happy so understand the nature of your mind as she gave you an example apply it in your own life and see you generate your suffering for yourself if you are not able to handle your mind and your emotions you I'm telling you your intelligence and your will will take the back seat. In fact, they will get hijacked. Your emotion only will dominate over your mind. So learn to control it and you will be successful anywhere, especially in your studies. Concentration you can build up if the mind is clear and there are no unnecessary resistances within. So this is what this conditioning should help you understand. How you condition your mind is going to decide how you are going to experience your inner life and how you experience your inner life, your thought world, your world of emotion is going to decide how you are able to function efficiently or inefficiently in life and that will decide your success. So get a hold on the subjective plane on your own mind. This is the purpose of all this study. Next thing is what are the factors affecting neural pathways? See this is something very important. I'm giving you ideas from neuroscience because this immediately you can relate to your life today. What is it that creates those grooves in which your energies move? You see, learning or cognitive experience is the first thing. Whatever you have exposed yourself to, it has become something you have learnt. That is one thing which creates your neural pathways. If you repeat whatever you have perceived or whatever you have thought of, that is creating your neural pathways and conscious attention spans. Anything you do consciously is creating your neural pathways. You understand? It is structuring your brain. It is rewiring your brain, it is deciding how you are going to think in the future. All of these factors. Easily make sure all of these are refined. In the sense, what you learn, your cognitive experiences, your exposures should be good enough. They are going to decide the content of your mind. What you repeat within yourself should be refined enough so that you create the right sanskars within you. Your conscious attention spans direct your energies towards what you want to achieve in life. You understand? Just exposing yourself to anything. Last time, last class, I think I told you that just handling your mobile because your mind is vacant, because you don't know what to do with your time, or the mind is too restless to concentrate. If you do such sort of things, you are simply wasting your energies. You understand this? You must handle technology as it will be beneficial to you, as a tool. Don't succumb to it. So these are the factors which create your neural pathways. All the time they are working for you. In fact, the law of neural connections, there's a whole law in that. We will apply it to your own life through examples, but just understand this Hebbian's law of neural connections. You see neurons that fire together wire together, he says. Isn't this quite obvious neurons that fire out of sync will fail to link and if you don't use certain pathways you will lose them. That's why there is repetition in school many times when you have to learn something they ask you to by heart the thing isn't it in religious people they keep repeating the same mantra, the same scripture, why do they do it? Why repetition is important? It is creating the solid neural pathway. That is why all of this is important. In your own life today, you see how the neural connections are getting formed. Neurons that fire together, wire together. If you are finding a mathematical concept difficult to understand, associate it with a picture. You can associate it with a visual aid. It will become slightly easier to understand. Next time, just the model which you have created will help you recapitulate the equation. This is how Hebbian's law of neural connections works for you even in your studies. So understand you are creating your neural pathways through your exposures, through your learning, through your repetition, through your conscious attention spans. This is actually the law of association and conditioning. This is how you create the nature of your mind. That is why do it consciously. You see, if you change any one of these, you can change your neural pathways. Hannah, if you give yourself a totally different kind of exposure, you are changing the connections in your brain. If you repeat the right things, discard the wrong things, you are changing your neural pathways. If you put consciously your attention on the right things in your life, many times, you are changing your neural pathways, if you put consciously your attention on the right things in your life, many times what happens is you are brooding about something which you will never experience in your life, you are worried about something which does not matter to you, it is totally irrelevant to your life, but you are worrying about it, you are giving a lot of emotion to it, Why do such things happen? These are ways of You see your entire energy will be side tracked if you indulge in all this. And then you don't have enough energy for concentration. So try to remove all these things from your life by conscious attention spans, focusing on what you want to achieve. You are capable of doing it. Aaj tak aapne yeh kiya hai That is why you are here today. Do it in a more doing it. You have done it till now, that is why you are here today. Do it in a more concentrated way. You create your neural pathways. Remember this. Ma'am, how would you define the subconscious mind? Very good. You see, what I am just now telling you is conscious attention spans. He is asking a question, what about the subconscious mind? For this I have created a model which I will show you just now. You see your conscious mind is just a strip on the subconscious mind. Whatever you consciously think, don't think it just remains there. Whatever you think, it goes and lodges itself into the subconscious. When you think it, we in Yoga psychology call it Vritti. It creates modification in the conscious mind that goes and lodges itself in the subconscious. Then we call it Sanskar. And it doesn't just sit there. It fructifies again into conscious thought after some time then we call it memory. It's your own conscious thinking at some point of time you did it you repeated it, it went into your subconscious it became a sanskar. These very sanskars generate your memories and memories fructify again in your conscious mind as thoughts after some time. See today you are hearing this lecture let me give See, today you are hearing this lecture. Let me give you an example. You're hearing this lecture today. Your conscious mind has generated a number of thoughts based on these slides. You have understood the concepts. What will happen now? When you repeat it, when you think over it again and again, it will go and lodge in your subconscious mind as a sanskar. A vritti sanskar bange. After some time, maybe after a week, you will recollect these concepts again when you need them. Maybe after a month, maybe after a week, you will recollect these concepts again when you need them maybe after a month, maybe after six months when you need any of these concepts you will recollect them which means you remove them from your subconscious mind they again become Vrittis again become conscious thoughts in your conscious mind. So you see memory is nothing but recycled conscious thought You understand recycle through your subconscious Subconscious mind takes in every impression of the conscious mind Everything will go and lodge itself in the subconscious is easily how you handle your conscious mind your everyday thinking Your feeling it's all important. It is going to decide the actual content of your entire mind. Conscious mind is a strip. Then there's subconscious. There's also an unconscious portion. So the thing is, how you handle your conscious mind. Your conscious mind is the inlet. So much matter of conscious mind is the inlet to the subconscious and the unconscious. So if you handle your conscious mind maturely, you actually decide the content of your entire mind. This is what I will show you in a slide. You see, yoga psychology on how to change your habits or neural pathways. Now see, this is your conscious mind, the upper strip. There you are generating your thoughts based on your exposures. I have given you two images there, roses and trees. Why I have given you those images is what you have taken through your senses is deciding your thoughts, isn't it? Whatever you see, whatever you hear, that creates the ideation in your mind, the mentation. That is called vritti, which means a modification in your mind. It doesn't just stay there, it goes into your subconscious and becomes your sanskar and after some time it will again fructify as conscious thought that is when you call it memories so this chakra keeps on running in our mind everything is decided by what you take in through the conscious mind isn't it that is generating your memories also later on what is memory is nothing but recycled conscious thought so be careful about what you see what you take in through your senses make sure it is the right and the good thing for you that will decide the contents of your mind that will decide entirely how your mind will function it is called vritti Sanskar Chakra. It is there in Patanjali Yoga Sutra. It is a huge commentary on Patanjali Yoga Sutras. There he dwells on this. So it is a perfect understanding of how your mind is functioning and this is what is creating your neural pathways. Habits you know once you create a, it is difficult to change the neural pathway. It is difficult to change. Why? You have started riding the horse, you don't know where it is taking you. Habit's nature is like this. You see in the word habit, H-A-B-I-T, if you remove H, what remains? A bit remains. If you remove A, what remains? A bit remains. If you remove A, what remains? A bit remains. If you remove B, still it remains. Habits cannot be easily changed. That's why right type of habits have to be created. Especially at this age. Now if you create the right type of habits, your whole life will just blossom. Bloom into something very beautiful. Now if you get bored, don't know what you are saying, it's not so very interesting I'm more interested in only things which stimulate my senses if this is the condition just now you will not be able to create the right habits understand you will fall for what is immediate you understand? and you won't be able to bounce back so easily so get a deep knowledge of the subject that is why I say that is why we are organizing, they are organizing these classes here so that you get a hold over yourself first before you start working in this world hmmm...so did you understand this? yes hmmm...so you understood this completely yes, you see what we are dealing with here is the working of your mind what is it that makes your mind work function, consciousness shining behind the mind because there is consciousness the mind becomes conscious that is why the conscious mind is able to retain whatever it sees. You understand, you see that video camera also is capturing images. What is the difference between you and the video camera? You are experiencing every image. It becomes an experience to you. You see this slide, you actually understand the whole concept. You experience the concept as an enlivened something within yourself. That video camera is tracking images, it doesn't experience anything. The difference is you are a conscious entity that has no consciousness. Do you understand? This is the difference between mind and consciousness. Because consciousness is standing behind the mind, your mind is able to function as a conscious entity. It is able to convert every image into experience. Try to capture this point. Aap dekho, what is light? Tell me. What is light? Tell me from your physics. Electromagnetic radiation. Yes, it is electromagnetic radiation within the visible range. Now, when, of course, it is electromagnetic radiation within the visible range. Okay. Now when, of course, it is electromagnetic radiation at a very wide range. Visible light is a small portion of it. When it enters into your eye, it becomes color to you. How? It is just electromagnetic radiation of a certain wavelength It becomes color to your experience How? If electromagnetic radiation enters a gadget Does it become color to... Does it experience color? How does it appear as color to you? Which means there is something inbuilt within you which enlivens that which gives it the characteristic of color which helps you experience electromagnetic radiation as color that is your consciousness every impression coming into you is an experience every sensation coming into you is an experience to you it is not an experience to the gadget which is tracking electromagnetic radiation this is the difference between living and non-living you understand you are living entities living means consciousness has come into manifestation it is enlivening the instrument non-living means not that consciousness is not there there is no instrumentation for it to enliven itself consciousness is always shining on everything It lends existence to non-living things It doesn't lend them consciousness But to living entities It is rendering them conscious So this is how consciousness and mind are related You cannot separate the two Because consciousness is shining on your mind Your mind is functioning as it should. Did you understand? Yes? How do we draw a line between the consciousness and the thoughts? Very good. What is the demarcating line between the two? You see, consciousness itself does not think. It thinks through the instrumentation of your mind. Your mind produces thoughts, but if the mind was producing thoughts and there was no consciousness, you would not know it is your thought, it is an end-lived something, you would not know that, because consciousness is shining behind the mind, your thought means something to you, your thought is an interpretation, the thought is something which is of value, which is meaning to you, because you are a conscious entity, because consciousness is shining on that thought, okay. Let me write here. Suppose I write here, life is beautiful. Does this screen experience this statement? But for you it means something, something very beautiful. The fact that life is beautiful has meaning for you. It has no meaning for the screen. You are a conscious entity. Your consciousness through your mind interprets the meaning of this. This is no conscious entity. So this has no value for this. This is the connection between consciousness and thought. You understand beautiful thoughts may be there. If they are in somebody's mind that is something beautiful otherwise thoughts by themselves what value they have you render things beautiful you give beauty to things which are beautiful easily I am saying understand the subject life will become more and more beautiful because your mind will become beautiful if you are all objective you get only superficial knowledge of Life will become more and more beautiful because your mind will become beautiful. If you are all objective, you get only superficial knowledge of things. If you penetrate into the subject, you will be seeing things from inside out. You will become a Rishi. Don't think Rishis ran away from life. They experienced life fully because they had hold over themselves. They had hold over their own minds. Yes, there's a question there. As for this right, like subconscious mind interpret whatever we see as consciousness, right? So the dream of a place which conscious mind never visits, so what you call how it is coming to a person? You are asking the image of something which you have never experienced. Yeah, dream of a place which a person never visits consciously. And it's coming in his mind. So how can it be? See, there are different explanations to this question. One is, in the past at some time, you may have visited some place which you have forgotten. There is also a past life theory, some point of time you have visited the place which you don't remember, so it is coming in your memory. You understand there are many such things you see mind, it's a huge reservoir of impressions from the very past, this is just one small phase of your your living you know what you call your life just now you are you are an old soul after so many experiences, in our scriptures, human birth happens so many experiences are already accumulated you never know what what is coming popping up in your memory just now from which experience. But it can also be pure imagination. You see something coming into your dream. Don't take it as something coming from past life. It need not necessarily be so. It could be just an imagination in your conscious mind at some point of time which you have forgotten. You understand? People sometimes they get nightmares. Maybe in childhood they had seen some movie which had some terrible scene and then that is popping up in much later and they have forgotten about the movie entirely. So this is also a possibility. So why is this happening? That doesn't matter. How is it happening? Why it is happening? That's the mechanism we are studying just now. You understand? Experiences can happen due to many things. Yes? Yes. Just the? The software. OK, OK, yes. Yes, yes. Being able to interpret with certain conditioning and certain learning. Yes. And another part, when we say that there was one more thing. Okay, so he's basically saying, what's the difference between mind, brain, and consciousness? Why should I say consciousness, why should I posit consciousness at all? It is to do with the hardware and software. You see, your mind is actually the software and the brain is the hardware. Something like your mobile instrument, the network is there, so your mobile instrument is working. The mobile instrument is the brain. The network is your mind that is bringing in all the stuff to you, whatever the mobile is showing you. He is saying this can be all that there is, please understand this, there is a basic difference between your mobile and you, what is the basic difference, mobile also is showing you many things, a robot can do many things, what is the difference between a robot and you, it will work only as per its programming, as per its software, you are working as per the software inbuilt in your mind, yes, but as a conscious entity, you are able to see the mind also objectively, you are able to experience the mind and interpret whatever the mind says, you can do this, a robot can't do this. This is how the difference is understood. Why is the mind not consciousness itself? Why does another entity called consciousness behind the mind? Because the mind is an object of cognizance for you. The mind can also block out awareness from time to time, you know, or allow awareness. Just a deep sleep may the mind actually shuts down. So you don't feel the awareness. Although awareness never shuts down so you don't feel the awareness although awareness never shuts down so you see your mind is an object of cognizance for you so you cannot be the mind alone it's an object it is something like an instrument in your hands that is why you are positing consciousness logically also you can understand it but you actually have to understand it through meditation if you remove thoughts from your mind which means you are shutting down the mind. Do you remain over or not? What happens if you remove thoughts from your mind? What happens? Nothing happens or awareness is there or well nothing happens you go into sleep. What happens? Awareness is always there. Thoughts come in and out of that awareness. What does it mean? There is awareness behind the thought process, behind the mind. It is always existing. That is why consciousness comes into the picture. You understand? You cannot explain everything just in terms of mind and brain. Just now you are thinking of awareness. But if you actually understand it through meditation, you will see your thought is actually entering your awareness and moving out of it. Awareness is fundamental even to the thought process this is a matter of experience this is not just a matter of thinking how can this be experienced? by stopping thought for sometime you can do it or by just penetrating into the heart of awareness you see if you have a very subtle meditative mind you can simply penetrate into the state. State of awareness. Then you will see, you can watch it clearly. Your thoughts, your emotions, your body consciousness, the objective world comes in and out of your awareness. It moves in and out. There is a primary reality, in which it comes and goes. This is the understanding you will arrive at. But without the power of yoga, the power of meditation, it will appear like awareness is just a thought because we are so identified with our thoughts. You understand this? This is the basic difference. He has asked a very valid question actually. This is the basic difference. This is why there is a way to understand these things. And that is through meditation. We will be going into that after some time. Get all these basic concepts clear. Now, yesterday we also discussed something about flow. Isn't it? About flow, yesterday we had... I had introduced you in the last class to this concept of flow. Here you have to understand some very important points. For your own sake to be able to handle your mind better, to generate concentration to a high degree, you have to understand a few points here. You see how to achieve this flow. Now this concept of flow as you may be knowing, it is given by Miha Zickzen Mihai, his name is like that. It's written a little differently, but that's how it's pronounced. He has given this wonderful concept, which means when are you absorbed in a particular task? It happens often in your life, you are absorbed in something particularly and it gives you a lot of joy when you are absorbed into it when your skill and your challenges meet you see if you are skillful at something and a corresponding challenge comes before you then you meet, you rise up to the challenge and it generates the state of flow in your mind it's a function between skills and challenges do you understand what I am saying? Suppose you are very good at calculus and a challenging problem came before you. You at once rise and attack the problem and you get absorbed in it. Flow will be generated naturally. Any activity where your skill meets your challenges. If the challenge is too great your skill is limited then what will happen? Anxiety will arise. If the skill is too great and the challenge is not there, then boredom will arise. But if the two are compatible, they rise together, skill is there and challenge has arisen, then naturally flow is generated in your system. You get into a state of deep concentration naturally, absorption. So this generates a lot of joy in your system. This is the joy of engagement. Now any activity which you like can absorb you. He says like for example, you see reading, rock climbing, playing music, creating, building, designing, card making, singing, playing tennis, solving mathematical problems, playing chess. Innumerable examples of flow are there, where flow can be generated in your system. What yoga psychology will add to this is, this is a wonderful concept. Yoga psychology will say, it's not necessary you require a challenge to generate flow. If a challenge is required, you are on push start. You can do this on self start. You can generate flow on self start just if you regulate your vrittis and pratyas. Sajatya ekagar vritti pravaha idya in Patanjali Yogasutras. Iska matlab hai you generate a state of deep level concentration and absorption by yourself. Even before a challenge has come before you you can generate it in your mind if you regulate your thoughts and vrittis which means the modifications the fluctuations of your mind in the last class I told you whenever you think a thought, your mind undergoes a modification that modification of your mind is called vritti and the thought itself is called Pratyaya. So by stabilizing both of them, the image I have given there is a picture of Vrittis and Pratyayas. If you stabilize those two, it means your thought is very stable. It is not shaky, which means your attention is very stable. And your Vrittis, which means the modification your mind undergoes due to the thought, that is is very stable and your vrittis which means the modification your mind undergoes due to the thought that is also very stable your mind is not shaky your mind does not break into vrittis or does not fluctuate does not turn this way in that way then you will be able to generate this state of flow spontaneously by yourself deep deep concentration, ekagrata you will achieve. So you see flow, it should be on self start. Then anything you apply to you, it will, you will be successful in that. You understand you can generate this in your own system by yourself. And this is the training given in Patanjali Yoga Sutras, your ability to do this. See if you cannot concentrate and hold your attention at a point you cannot be successful in life. Do you understand? Successful people are people whose concentration and attention does not flicker they are able to maintain consistent and concentration for long periods of time sustain their concentration and without too much effort without stressing themselves how they are able to do it basic stability of vritti and pratyay is there basic inner stability is there so this is something you have to learn to generate in your system tab aapko. Then you will rise up to any challenge naturally. You will naturally develop the skill towards it. So this is a possibility with you. Your entire success in life depends upon your concentration. Your happiness depends upon your concentration. You know, analyze your states of supreme happiness. They were states of absorption into something maybe maybe but states of absorption in your mind, isn't it true something these days you know you are asked to be on very erratic modes of thinking and life what is called the excitability mode you don't get that much happiness in this analyze it and see for yourself just to be excited about something you will remove the happiness from your system if you are stable and balanced and deep calmness prevails in you and this kind of stability flow will be generated in any activity and you will always be happy flow leads to happiness it's a factor for happiness flow will be generated in any activity and you will always be happy flow leads to happiness it's a factor for happiness it engages you deeply spontaneously into something without even too much of conscious effort and you experience a higher form of happiness due to that so learn to generate it in your own system by bringing stability to your attention this is the real thing then you will be on self-start this is another factor which contributes to your happiness now I also spoke about levels of happiness in the next last class you see these are the levels of happiness available to you it is actually a ladder inbuilt in your central nervous system and brain this is a ladder inbuilt in your central nervous system and brain. This is a ladder inbuilt within you. The lowest rung of the ladder is sensory happiness. After that is thought or the level of emotion. If these two are refined, you step up to the next rung. After that is intellectual happiness. You can add a lot here. Like here I can add the level of creativity this generates a lot of happiness for you, isn't it creative work, you take up something like music, painting along with your regular curriculum and you see your mind remains so fresh because it's a creative output from your side and then intellectual happiness, any form of abstract thinking and absorption, and higher levels of creativity, all this generates an enormous amount of happiness in your system. Spiritual happiness also has to do with service. Here I can add service, service activities, acts of kindness, which you will be doing in your practicals, acts of empathy, a Satbhaav towards everyone. By doing this your mind will always remain glad. A gladness will prevail in your mind. There is no need for anything. If this thing comes in my life then only I will be happy. Such equations you will not make. Your mind is naturally happy because it is in a particular sattvic state of very balanced emotion refined emotion higher thinking of greater awareness so you see this is a ladder of happiness given to you now the problem occurs in your life if you try to maximize happiness only at the sensory level, many times what we feel is, by accumulating things here, my happiness will increase. Here just now maybe there are things which make me happy, the latest iPhone is making me feel very happy, so if I go on accumulating at this level, things like the iPhone, today iPhone, tomorrow the latest television, after that this and that and that and that object. If you accumulate only at one level, you will not become proportionate. Yesterday, the last class, I told you about diminishing marginal returns in your investments. It's something like that. There will be diminishing return if you work only at one level. The way to happiness is step to the next rung of the ladder. Here minimal, next better, but still it's not long lasting. The next rung is even better. You see intellectual absorption, think and see, it gives you far greater joy. Isn't it? Generation of flow in intellectual activities gives you great joy. Service activities will actually flood your mind with happiness. At that moment of time, you may not understand. Over a period of one week, you will understand your mind is in such a beautiful state. Why? You have done something for somebody somewhere. Service activities give you that joy and then spiritual joy, the joy of inner absorption, meditation, concentration at very high levels all this will actually absorb you within, the highest level of joy, ecstasy what is called Bhav Samadhi, you must have heard, last time there was a question on Samadhi. It's a vertical ladder and the higher the rung you climb, the more long-lasting is your happiness. Understand this from this ladder. And where is this ladder built? In your own system. In your central nervous system and brain. That is why Yoga is such a method which helps you systematically climb this ladder. You understand? You see, Yoga leads to altered states of awareness which yield higher happiness it will naturally take you up this ladder that's why bring something of this into your life I have given an image there, it is an image of where all you can concentrate there are certain junction points in your own system where you can concentrate pranayik energy, so in yoga we say that if you concentrate on right points, it will lead to higher awareness in your system. It's a way of climbing this ladder of happiness. We will try to understand this in a more concentrated way. Yes, one minute, one. Yes. Yes, one minute, one, yes, yes, should we? No, not abandon, stop the accumulation of things just at one level, this is what you will be doing, once you get happiness at a certain level, let me take the example of a sweetmeat maybe you like masala dosa very much how much can you have and over a period of week how much can you have after that you will get bored with it if you overindulge you will get fed up with it so what you have to do is go to the next rung of the ladder maximizing, trying to maximize happiness there only, this is a very small thing. Many times you do this with all sorts of emotions. If you try to maximize it there, it will only lead to frustration. This is a law in yoga. Did you understand? This is how you climb the next ladder. Can I just give an example? Yes. See, on a, like, okay, today I have a Hyundai i10, okay? It's a car that takes me from point A to point B, which is the whole purpose of a car, okay? But I want a BMW, and I will not be happy till I don't get that BMW. Is that really necessary to my happiness? It's not. It's doing nothing. There is no utility aspect. That is why. I collect enough money, I get a super job, I get lots of money and I buy my BMW. For one week I am very happy, for one month I am very happy, I show off in front of my relatives, my neighbours, my everybody. After that it gets a few scratches, it just becomes another car. Now I want that, I have bought a 3 series, now I want a 7 series. So what I do is... At one level you are trying to maximize happiness. So that will not work. And that will always be for a short span of time. Yeah, but instead if I say I'm happy with my I10 or maybe I can get a more, I have a big family now, you know, I've got a second child has come in, so I need a maybe a slightly bigger car, but I'm looking at the utility factor. So I am working on a sensory level, I am working on a worldly level, but I am taking things which are of utility to me, not because I want to show off, not because my neighbor has it or somebody else has it. And then I am focusing my mind on the thing that will really give me more happiness, which is music. So I love going to concerts and I realize when I am in a concert and this beautiful music, it gives me far more happiness than driving in a Mercedes or in a BMW. And then I realize I go on to an intellectual thing. Sometimes I'm sitting with my friends and having a real intellectual discussion. And that evening was the best evening of my life. Have any of you experienced something like that? Yes, on a regular basis, I think you experience it, isn't it? There are different levels of happiness that is why. And you are asked to climb one rung after the other. I just want to ask, what is emotional happiness? I can understand sensory, intellectual, spiritual and creative. What is emotional happiness? Emotional happiness means the happiness that you get from good feelings like kindness empathy But that is service Yes, in service activities you see, in service activities what happens is, your whole system gets refreshed. Here I am just talking about emotional happiness at this run Your loved ones Yes yes now for example here in the emotional level if you have good feelings then only you will get the service you will have the propensity for service only if you put yourself in the in a very empathetic position which means you are empathizing with somebody who doesn't have something maybe so that's why this is the second rung of the ladder. Encouraging good emotions. You are verily what your emotion is. So that is why this forms the second rung of the ladder. When you actually do the act based on this emotion, your whole system will get flooded with joy. You know, your health will also improve. The more you do for others, Vivekananda always said If you only lock yourself within yourself, you will be a very miserable person. It will only lead to frustration. Swamiji said, if you want to lose your peace of mind, think only of yourself. If you want peace of mind, learn to think of others. So all these are natural methods for you to expand your mind, expand your awareness and develop inner joy. You don't need any object if you keep doing this. You see there are many very many philanthropists, you see their life, you read the life of Bill Gates. What is it that gave these people this incentive to do so much of good work? Read the life of Bill Gates In terms of, because intellectual is self based. Okay. I have to think about somebody. Yes, that applies maybe in her case. In many cases, the emotional, the effective experience is more important than the intellectual experience. Yeah, this is quite obvious in many cases, but not in all cases. In some people, intellectual joy will, you see intellectual joy is not essentially selfish. You cannot say it is for me. When you are actually attacking a problem or solving a mathematical problem you actually become impersonal and your contribution also will be like that. You know intellectual contribution makes you impersonal. Many times. I can give you one wonderful example right from the life of Sir Albert Einstein. It's a wonderful example. You see the importance of knowledge, how it liberates you from the self. When the Jewish state was created, Israel was created, you know, as the first president, Einstein was welcomed to become the first president of Israel. And he refused. That time he was in the US. He was a German Jew who had settled in America. And he refused. And then they asked him, why? You are also a Jew and then it would be a great thing for this nation if you... He was already so famous due to his E is equal to MC squared, it would be such a good thing if you took up the president of this new nation, new state. And you know what he said? He said, look, president will come and president will go, but an equation is forever. Knowledge, intellectual, this level of activity liberates you from the self, liberates you from the ego. So you cannot say it is actually selfish work. It's a higher level of joy. Anybody will experience it. Anybody who works at that level of intellect actually liberates you from everything. Intense involvement. This will be the kind of lifestyle you will adopt in the future because you will be working at that level that level of intellectual activity you understand it should liberate you from the self analyze your best moments of happiness they were a liberation from all objects all concepts it was a complete freedom and awakening into full awareness only it happened unconsciously. It was given to you as a gift. You can learn to build it up consciously. This is what we are saying. Through transcending this ladder. Yes. No, even if you do not know the value of what, means somebody doing to service you mean. Even if you do not know the value of what you are doing, doing the thing has an impact on your mind. I may not know this ladder you understand, but doing the service activity will put me into a state of higher happiness. Do you understand? Doing the thing creates the Sanskar. In the previous slide I showed you, Vritti creates Sanskar. By thinking of something, the sanskar is created. Doing creates it even better. First you think it out and you act according to that thought and the sanskar will be very solid. That's why you have practicals in this course. You have to go and do some things. It's a beautiful way for you to experience higher happiness, you yourself will understand, this happiness does not come to you in the form of excitability, you understand, it's not something which comes to you in the form of something you feel immediately about but it will gladden your heart and mind to such a measure even after a week, you know this is an experiment carried on service activities and this is what it was found, even after a week you are in a happy very balanced state of mind because of that service act, your heart is expanded. So, is tara ka joy this gives you. Now, let me go into this. We have only a few minutes now. You see insights of yoga. What exactly does yoga psychology, what insights it throws into happiness. You see in the first graph which I've given you, this is the normal way in which you experience happiness. Over time, you see there's a base level of happiness to which your moods will keep coming to. When good things happen, your happiness peaks a little. When bad things happen, it dips a little, and it keeps coming to the base level of happiness. A kind of stability which you try to, at this age, you know, you are generally quite happy. The base level is generally quite high. Now what yoga, Vedanta, and all, a matters, not just that you will not dip, but the very base level will rise higher. The base level of your happiness will be higher. The gladness that prevails in your mind due to higher awareness, due to freedom from unwanted thoughts, due to freedom from wrong conditioning, all this will make you more and more happy. The quality of happiness will be much better. So the base level of happiness is raised through yoga practice, through meditation. You understand it's not just about regulating your mood fluctuations. The very level of your happiness is raised higher. This is an equation also which you should understand. Just a bit, sunke raklo, at at some point of time maybe you can use it you see your vital energy levels, what is the meaning of vital energy? the psychic energy inside you there is a flow of psychic energy in your system which makes thought possible which makes emotion possible yogis try to understand everything through psychic energy and jnanis and all these people try to understand everything through psychic energy and Jnanis and all these people try to understand through thought and Bhaktas try to understand through emotion. Intellectual people try to understand through intellectual concepts. So you see vital energy is an important part of your being. You can localize it at different levels in your body. I showed you an image of that yoga before this. You can localize it at certain junction points according to that your awareness unfolds this is what this graph is saying the greater the vital energy in your system the more committed to higher levels the greater will be your awareness. Those two graphs are the most profound actually the the graphs are the most profound actually. The graphs are telling you your happiness is an exponential function of your awareness. The level of awareness in your mind decides your happiness. If awareness level is very low, you know what will prevail in your mind? Unwanted thoughts, worries, anxieties, all kinds of emotions, if awareness levels are high, thoughts are under your control, emotions are under your control, so happiness will be at its peak, happiness is proportional to the awareness in your mind, it's an exponential function of your awareness actually and if awareness levels peak, happiness will peak, if awareness levels speak happiness will peak if awareness level dip all kinds of negativities worries can find place in your mind so how to generate culture cultivate higher awareness in the mind this is what actually yoga is about so in care of Chloe cheese a comedy at the head birth so you understand how I generate happiness in my system by myself not due Listen to it, these things come in handy a lot. you that. Next let's go to well we don't have time for this today because time is nearly up isn't it didi 7.30 I will just go into this and finish with today's talk you see your happiness and awareness this is connected to the last slide this is how they are related your experience of life is in your awareness right okay you agree with this awareness is always experienced in the first person is this right huh it is not in the third person your awareness is always in the first person and it is fundamental to your thought process because awareness is there thought means something to you thought is an enlivened something so this is the first point awareness percolates through the intellect and mind and enlivens them this is the first point. Awareness percolates through the intellect and mind and enlivens them. This is what we learned in the last class and this class. If they are clear, your happiness will be clear. You see, your instruments of perception, your mind, if that has clarity, awareness translates into happiness there. If that is clouded, cluttered with all sorts of thoughts, all sorts of negative things, your awareness gets blocked and so no happiness. Then you need objects to keep you happy. You will always be chasing objects. Do you understand this second point? It's a vital point. Third, this is what is called the Satvik state of mind where awareness dominates over the thought process. You are capable of this state. If the mind is in Rajasic or Tamasic mode, awareness will be very minimal. So you require objects constantly. You can just click it instead of writing it. Click with your camera, the slide, and take it home. You see, in the Sattvic state of mind, awareness will dominate over the thought process. And that is why your happiness is ensured. Sattva ensures happiness without objects. It will be a state of your own mind. The fourth is, that is why the elements of happiness in the sattvic state are awareness, calmness, serenity, vitality and positive emotions. You see, it's an inbuilt thing. You generate it by yourself. You are not slave to any object. You understand? You still you can relate with objects, bring them into your life, but you know how to handle them. You know how much to invest in them. So happiness is a state of mind based on sattva. These are all laws of yoga psychology, absorb it within you happiness is a state of mind based on sattva, a state is not an object based conditional space, it is independent of content but dependent on awareness and it can be generated not by the influx of objects but by the unfoldment of greater and greater awareness, so how you can work upon this is what you should see. Then you get your happiness from your own system. Many people, especially spiritual people, you will see they generate the happiness from within themselves. Isn't it? They are disconnected from objects. They are disconnected even from relationships and all this. How are they able to do it? Your own disconnected from objects. They are disconnected even from relationships and all this. How are they able to do it? Your own system, the source of happiness is right within yourself. If you tap into it and refine your system, make your system such that it is able to bring that inner light out, that inner consciousness and joy out, you will always remain happy. This was Vivekananda's very definition of religion and education. He used to say religion is the manifestation of the divinity already in man and education is the manifestation of the perfection already in man. Perfect your instrument, the inner happiness, the inner joy, consciousness, everything will come out. You are perfectly capable of doing it. We will stop here for today because time is up. We will continue in the next consciousness everything will come out you are perfectly capable of doing it we will stop here for today before because time is up we will continue in the next class
 I will see you in the next class. Om Asato Maa Sadgamaya Tamaso Maa Jyotir Gamaya Mrityor Maa Amritam Gamaya Om Shanti Shanti Shanti Today we will have a story from the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad Upanishad. You know your experience of life, who decides your experience of life? Your mind? In fact, your experience of life is an interpretation of your mind many times. So, this is what this story is going to illustrate to you. It seems when these three categories, the gods and the demons and the human beings were created, everyone was very worried as to who would educate them. Education is so very important, no, because your mind starts functioning in a particular way, in a particular direction due to your education. So, they were wondering and then everybody decided that well I think we think Prajapati Brahma should teach them. So, then the first thing which he made them do is he made them go through a course of discipline tapasya all of them and then they lived with the with the guru for some time they they followed a rigorous course of discipline they practice celibacy and then with all this the normal course which the Vedic student had to undergo they went through that and then after that they were they asked Brahma to give some instruction to them and the only instruction he gave was he just uttered the word the just the now each one according to their nature they interpreted this word he said well can the devas tell me what this means and they told him that well the maybe it means dhammyatam, dhammyatam is dhamankarana, dham, what does it mean? We have studied this, it is actually self-control, controlling something, so the the might mean dhammyatam they said and he said you are perfectly right and then then he asked the category humans, human beings that what do you understand by them, the. And then they said it means dhanam, dattam, giving. Now see each one is giving a different answer and Prajapati Brahma is telling right. He said right to this also. They are teaching us some very profound lessons. You see first of all, self-control. When the Devas are saying that this teaching means self-control, this is primary to a good life. Ye aap soch ke dekho apne aap. If what happens due to control is, your energies are capable of moving to the next higher level. That is why control. Tapasya ka kya matlab hai pata hai tap dhatu se aata hai tapasya tap means to heat up to heat the system why are you heating up the system what happens when you heat up your science students you can go to the next higher level that is what happens to your psyche also that is what happens to all your faculties when you when they are controlled at a certain level they get the capacity to move to the next higher level that is the very purpose of self-control and dhanam which the human beings are saying that the meaning of the is dhanam what is this dhanam about why should you be a giver in life well if I get more enjoyment just by getting things why should I not be just a go-getter why should I be a giver because you see that is the only way you can function the you can maintain the cycle of life you are getting from life you should be able to give you should be able to replenish otherwise you bear a negative karmic account, what our destiny will be like, so if you are not a giver you have a negative karmic, you may have a very good bank balance but you will have a negative karmic account which means the experiences coming into your life will not be very good, the more you give the more you balance this you understand that is why daan is important so Prajapati Brahma said yes very good even to the human category and then the third the demons they were asked well what is your interpretation of this word the and they said maybe it is dayadham, daya, compassion that is also very necessary in life so Prajapati Brahma said yes very good you're right that is the meaning of this word the see a compassionate outlook so long we have been studying positive emotions isn't it Jis hriday mein daya na ho, us hriday mein positivity nahi aati hai, you sort of you yourself dig your own grave you go into a depression phase if this these soft emotions are not there in your mind so even this is a very important aspect of understanding see this teaching the it is encompassing some very important lessons for us because all these students went through a course of discipline they were able to give this kind of an interpretation to that word everyone interprets according to his understanding and nature. So, who is the supreme interpreter of everything your mind as is your mind. So, will be your understanding of life as is your mind. So, will be your experience of life and in a very deep sense this holds this story actually ends here because all that they want to tell us through this story is your mind is so very important and each one is going to interpret every experience according to his nature but observe this closely and see it is not just about well if I have a good a good positive attitude of mind I will have a good experience of life if I do not have negativities then I will not be hurt by this and that I will not have pain in life it is not just about this this is a surface aspect but if you dive deep within the mind you know you come across the very matrix the very structure of mind what we are calling mind and this structure you know the basic parameters that make this structure it's very interesting this is hardcore Vedanta time space and causation are inbuilt in your mind that is the actual matrix of your mind you can say it's the texture of Maya which means to say the consciousness itself manifests as this diversity, this multiplicity. You see immediately when you think of I you do not think of consciousness, you think of body mind complex. So, this comes because your interpretation is through your mind which already has an inbuilt mechanism of time space and causation. You think you are an individual being limited in time this particular time and limited in space. I am such and such in this particular time I am existing and here I am existing. This is your conception of yourself. Now what are you doing? You are interpreting your true being through the prism of your mind which is already which already has an inbuilt mechanism of time, space and causation built into it so that your interpretation is through that. This is a hard point to digest but think about it. You are already in a way deeply conditioned into these parameters and you are functioning through them. This is the very texture of you are already in that. So when you ask the question how did Brahman become this world or how is the supreme reality why this world why this creation you are already asking it through an through the interpretation is through the prism already please see this do you believe this that time begins when mind begins see when I told you time space and causation are in inbuilt in the mind what does that actually mean practically time begins when your mind begins now can this be true you are used to the concept of linear time that you are in time, time is not in you but now Vedanta is telling you time is in you and time begins when your mind begins What is the proof of this? Tell me, do you have any proof of this? Nahi? Ye aise ek statement banar rahe hain? Very good and your everyday experience of sushupti deep sleep you see mind shuts down no sense of time which means what time is in the mind observe this closely when mind shuts down you have no concept of time, you do not know if you slept for 2 hours or 4 hours or 6 hours only you have to see your alarm clock and that will tell you how long you slept, the sense of time is vanquished which means what it was inbuilt in your mind, so time begins when mind begins, see how they are studying space begins when identification with the body begins if there is no identification with the body you are in that state also much of the time you have not seen it closely that's all when identification with body begins the sense of space begins in you again see your state of Sushupti you are not identified with anything at that time there is a spacelessness about the experience you have no sense of space causation begins see I'm giving you very generalized deep level ideas think and see what it means causation begins when objective limitation has begun when you are limited as one particular object, causation begins for you. See let me put a little some amount of explanation into this. None of these is absolute. Time space and causation none of these is. See what is time basically? In science also you will say time is the interval between two events. Are two events absolute? no they are relative so how can the interval between them be absolute? time is also relative, space is relative, causation is relative because it is relative it is not absolute it is an inbuilt mechanism of your mind you are interpreting reality through this mechanism you understand that is why you see multiplicity the one consciousness which Vedanta is calling Brahman you see as this world if I remove these limits you will see things as they are isn't it a big case in limits co-economic norm data in Vedanta their terminology very specific terminology is there when you are limited by time they will say you have what is called kala parichit it's a limit in time now if I remove this limit in time what happens you become timeless which means what you are you become eternal you are not limited by time which means you are eternal isn't it if you are limited by space when you are not limited by time which means you are eternal isn't it if you are limited by space when you are identified with body you are limited by space then I will say you are Desha Parichit you are in within the limits of space if you remove this that is if you transcend mind in Samadhi if you remove this what will happen you become spaceless which means what you become omnipresent you are not limited by space isn't it obvious you're getting the logic of it you are similarly you are limited by causation the causal limit is there if it is removed if it is transcended in samadhi what will happen you are not limited as an object you are everything consciousness is everything it is appearing as different names and forms the one thing that very water is appearing as the wave and the bubble and this and that isn't it it's a they are all formations in that very one substance so also if you remove remove your limits you come to the original stuff and that is why they say kala parichet shunyam if you become desha parichet shunyam if you become vasu parichet shunyam if you become you go to your original state original stuff that you are which is brahman the ultimate reality of consciousness this is what you are if I see that very same brahman through the instrumentation of a mind which has the inbuilt mechanism of time space and causation I see myself as this such and such and such you as such and such and such, this world of diversity, multiplicity, mind boggling variety, everything is name and form, actually consciousness with an outer crust of name and form and you are seeing only the name and form because you yourself have become limited by it, so understand what an important light this is throwing just like how you know when when gravity was discovered yes he has a question causation, causal limit means if you are limited as an object as one particular object only obviously you cannot be any other object you see this is only a pen this is not anything else this is only a table this is not anything else now this is a limitation according to Vedanta if you break through this limitation you will not be bound by your not to be bound by causation means you are not that particular object only you are everything in a sense ab yeh conceive karna difficult hai, the idea is this that in samadhi you can break down time, space and causation. You see the stuff as it is, you will see every object as it is. Jab Vedanta mein bolte hai na, sarvam khalvidam brahma, it's not a poetic statement merely that they are making, that is the perception they are getting through their state of existence at that time the consciousness has gone to such a high level they see everything as one they see everything as Brahman so the when you break through the three limits you will see things as they are this is the philosophical explanation. It is a more and more generalized views of reality they are giving you actually speaking. When gravity was discovered in 1665 Newton actually united the heavens and the earth through the discovery of gravity. He knew how gravity works, he could not explain gravity. Nobody can actually explain a force what it is, is not it? You it everyone knows that it is something that brings objects which have masses together, but why what it is actually we do not know. But when the general theory of relativity was discovered by Einstein, how did you understand that gravity? You see it is a more generalized more profound in-depth concept of gravity. What is actually gravity? It is a warp, it is a curve in space time, the object creates the warp, the curve and so, it appears like a force to you like a ball travelling along a trampoline. How it actually, you see the joining between those two points is what you are calling force. It is a warp created by the mass of that object. So, you see this is a deeper explanation of the concept of force is not it this is what Vedanta is giving you by making you understand where are time space and causation located in your mind if you think you are in time if you think you are in space if you think you are in causation then you get the opposite idea you understand. Think and see clearly is time in me or am I in time is time something linearly moving and I am in that or is time an idea in my mind think and see this clearly, your own existential experience will tell you, you are in time, I mean time is in you, time is inbuilt in your mind, the recording of time, the interval between two events, the record happens in your mind. So, if you understand this, you will get a totally different perception of what time space and causation means. This is the basic fabric which both science and Vedanta are using. Only one is telling you, you in your own experience, through your own experience you study it. The other one is telling you third-person perspective. Study it through object, I mean instruments, measurements. Think and see. Ek Vedantic idea yaha par diya gaya hai which is very profound. Now you must reflect on it and then you will catch it, yes so ma'am you said the time is outside and your time is inside that is the thing going on, right no I said that usually you think time is there already I am moving with it, right, time is already there what Vedanta is telling you is time is in you. When we look at human biological systems, suppose they are located on one side of Atlantic and other side of Atlantic and so the sun would come at some particular time and it would set at some particular time. So the kind of hormonal schemes that we see they are distinctly separated in both the areas. So, if time would have been within me stuff it would have been similarly present transatlantic both the sides, but that is not the case. So, I think time is somewhere right out there and we are. Yes, the general perception is like that because we have used we have become used to understanding time in terms of events and an interval between any two events taking place anywhere is what I'm calling time but what we are telling you is the perception the recording of time the idea of time everything is conceived in your mind time stops for you from time to time time stops for you in your everyday experience in Sushupti that means you see the idea of time is in your mind reflect on this I am not saying believe it reflect on this and you will try grasp what they are trying to say in your own experience time halts in your own experience you start the record again in your own experience you need an external factor to show you the existence of time okay the next point which we will discuss today are some clues to self-knowledge some hints I will give you as to how see he asked a very good question the exact state of Samadhi and what how do we get there exactly what are the clues available in our everyday experience which can lead us to that something of this we will discuss you have to observe very carefully to catch the points but I will tell you this Naito it will not strike you if it doesn't strike you it won't mean anything to you I'll give you a number of clues sit straight all of you and pay attention meditation just I heard the very first clue which I will tell you is what are we studying clues to self-knowledge how to know about the self just through clues in your everyday life now observe this the first clue is your sense of I, I-ness has remained the same so far although your body and mind have gone through all the experiences of life isn't it see you were that baby then you became a toddler then you became a child and then a teenager and now you are a young person you have passed through so many experiences but your sense of I has remained the same body has changed mind has changed enormously but I sense has not changed it is unpunctuated by time and by space what a great clue this is how do you remain changeless when body and mind has changed it's a clue to the changeless reality in you which you have not observed this is one clue which Vedanta gives you situations, objects, world everything will change but your sense of yourself does not change please see this the second clue is you see to think some amount of effort you have to put you have to put attention to something to become conscious of an object you have to consciously pay attention to think of know to something to become conscious of an object you have to consciously pay attention to think of a person or to interact with a person you have to consciously direct your attention outward just to be aware do you need any effort just to be aware that means awareness is your real nature. If that awareness is invested in thought and attention, you become conscious of objects and people and other things. If it is uninvested, you are just there. What does not require mediation, does not require effort is primary that is your real nature. doesn't require effort is primary that is your real nature these are very basic clues right now it is there available to your experience you have not noticed it we are just helping you notice it see this clearly then if your thoughts are coming into your awareness and moving out of it your emotions are coming just now watch your mind and see what is happening many things are popping up in your mind and falling out also you're remembering something that also moves out some conscious thought comes that also moves out some emotion pops up that also goes out now it is going in and out of what? your awareness when it comes into your awareness you become aware of that thought when it goes out well it just falls out of your perception this is what is happening please see it right now it is happening when you become conscious now see suddenly if I draw your attention to a PPT slide then you become conscious of it, your awareness got invested in that. Everything is moving in and out of your awareness please see this which means what the primary reality about you is your awareness everything moves in and out of it. See this door is there if you pass through this door in and out everybody passes in and out of this door, every object passes in and out of this door, the reality here is the door then, is not it? Everything else is moving in and out of it, your awareness is like that, everything when it comes into your awareness you become conscious of it, when it moves out of your awareness you don't know what it is what it means so you see your awareness is the primary reality about you this is what Vedanta is telling you everything moves in and out of your awareness when you stop thought the third clue I'm giving you if you stop thought what remains over nothing see awareness remains over just plain awareness remains over if you stop thought that is why you never ask well do I exist or not do you ever ask a question like this? I'm not sure if I exist. You always exist. What exists always? Thoughts don't exist always. You exist always. You are awareness. Please see it. It's in your own experience. Then see the three states which I told you that is the fourth clue, you are experiencing Jagrat, Swapna and Sushupti every day. Now please see this, you are common to the three states, is not it? You were present, you are common, the common factor there is you. Now in the dream also you have different bodies, different minds, so what is common? In Sushupti you are absolutely you do not know if body and mind existed, both have shut down, your senses have shut down, mind has shut down, but you remained over. In the dream you had a different body still you remained over. So, what is it that remains over? Are you catching the point? You are the common factor of the three states of your experience every day, but you take up different bodies in your dream, is not it? Maybe you saw Superman movie, you became Superman in dream, but that somebody has recorded that experience, please see this and in Sushupti you are bodyless in a sense you have recorded the state of non experience now I would not say non experience non perception of anything the experiencer was there and then in again you're saying in the waking state well this is how I experienced the three states so what does it mean obviously you have been there but in different bodies and minds so the common factor is you as awareness not as body and mind then this is called the maha tarka you know this is called the great logic of Mandukya Upanishad Anvyai Vethireki Yukti this is trying to find the unchanging common factor of an experience then see in ordinary the next clue I'm giving you are you seeing the importance of these clues what are they pointing towards see in normal perception this physical light is required for you to perceive anything but tell me who lights up your dreams what light is that how do you see the dream as real something real it has its impact on you you experience the dream isn't it in what light what is that light think and tell me The light of your awareness that functions like light that is why light is used as a very strong metaphor to explain awareness. You light up your dream, create the objects, spin your dream, experience it, get impacted by it, get up and say what you have experienced. It is entirely your creation. So please see in that is why the dreamer self in Advait Vedanta is called Tejasa, Tejomayatva Tejasa. That Tej is nothing but awareness through which you see the dream then you know in the wonderful thing about a dream is in the dream itself you do not ask is this a dream if you ask you would have you would be in the waking state in the dream the dream is absolutely real to you hundred percent real only when you wake up you know that is a dream so it has such powerful impact on you that's what I'm telling you these are real experiences for you they are not just thought constructs and out of that you are drawing the clues for existential experience Vedanta you light up your dreams you as awareness have lit up that dream and seen it, acknowledge this. Then the fact of your memory that is another powerful clue, am I going too fast, catch each point, how is memory possible you tell me, preceding event, a succeeding event, a common factor has joined the two that's why you remember both the events now who's the common factor there you have remained over you saw this experience you saw that experience you connected the two memory is only possible if there is an enduring knower, please see this, which is common to both, both the experiences. That is why in Brahmasutras actually, they say this, the fact of memory, due to the fact of memory, the immutability of the cognizer has to be recognized. It is a very important clue, very valid point. Then see see you are composed of so many different different parts you have hands and feet and face and sense organs so many things but you feel you are one unit one composite unit you function as one unit isn't it so naturally you are not merely identified with the body. You function as one composite unit, a sense of changelessness and continuity is there in that unit. Although parts are changing, body is changing, hair is growing, this is happening, that is happening, but you think you are one unit changeless unit. This itself is a clue that your the reality about you is changeless unit this itself is a clue that your reality about you is changeless then that is why you know you do not you are not even aware of your age you ask anybody no matter what his age is even a 70 year old he will have to think to say I am 70 year old by himself in his own experience he doesn't feel he is 70 year old because awareness has no age no matter what age you are when you identify with the body you feel you are 20 year old or 30 year old or 40 year old or 50 year old if you are not identified with the body you have no sense of age you always feel young awareness never ages so this is how how many clues are there you see isn't this a very valid clue? they will unless they consciously think of their age they will not feel that age then there is a distinct feeling of you being within the body you feel you are in here isn't it and you are conscious of the body the body is not conscious of you isn't it is the body conscious of you you are conscious of the body so you feel you are in this body what is in this body tell me that itself means you are not the body so you feel you are in this body what is in this body tell me that itself means you are not the body you are functioning through a body isn't this a very valid logical clue hands and feet are not conscious of you, you are conscious of your hands and feet, sense organs are not conscious of you, you are conscious of your sense organs, you are separate from them if you analyze anything as being an object for you you are separate from it Drik Drishya Vivek this is what is called Drik Drishya Vivek isn't it you are not identified with it if I see my organs my body as separate it means I'm not the body if I see my mind as separate I'm not the mind isn't it it's so obvious we get consciously go and get identified with this and that and start claiming I'm this and that in your own experience you are never this and that you are only self-aware because this training is not given to you, you go and identify immediately with this and that and start claiming I am this and that see if this is true or not I leave it to you a simple example I can give you aap apni selfie lete ho na? lete ho na? now tell me in that selfie who is when you look at your selfie and admire it who is admiring whom? who is admiring what? tell me practical Vedanta will draw from your own experience your mind is seeing your body and just now you are seeing that your mind is seeing your body your intellect is seeing your mind seeing your body three elements of your own personality have come here but all this happens where in your awareness in your awareness your intellect functions so as to see your mind seeing your body you are that awareness alone the rest is the instrumentation you can choose to identify you can choose to disidentify but you are not that see this, this much you should see truth is to be seen then it will have tremendous impact on your mind just see it as it is you know truth has corrosive effect once you know the truth about something it will corrode its way into your personality whether you want it or not so just know the truth that's all then let me give you there are I have plenty of clues but I will give you a few more you always see yourself as an aware entity do you do you feel you are unaware anytime body is not aware mind is not aware until it comes in contact with that awareness but your sense of yourself is always one see you feel enlivened isn't this true life you feel full of life you feel full of vitality which means what your very nature is that your very nature is that your nature is not immediate identification because of so many external factors maybe it is required in some particular situation so you identify with this and that may be it is required for your social status so you identify with this and that your own existence if you analyze without any compunction without any form of pressure you will see what what your real nature is what Vedanta is telling you, you are only self-awareness that is manifesting through this body-mind complex, this is what they are trying to tell you, to see yourself next clue to see yourself you need a mirror to know yourself what do you need think and tell me to see yourself you need a mirror to know yourself yes he said it right all you need is awareness if you are just self-aware you will know you will not just know who you are you will also know what you're working through you know your mind you know the function of your body the more you cultivate awareness the more you heighten awareness through definite techniques the more this will appear very obvious to you that's why you see these are like steps yoga leads to Vedanta this understanding leads to that knowledge see it in it's in your own experience we are not creating some kind of a theory in fact I don't go into theories at all your own experience you must analyze it point-blank absolutely without identification without bringing in any bias prejudice any kind of pressure from outside if you analyze it point blank absolutely without identification without bringing in any bias prejudice any kind of pressure from outside if you analyze it you will get you yourself will get all these clues that is why you know Vedanta has had the greatest appeal on thinking minds this is pure Vedanta what I am giving you even western minds Emerson, Walt Whitman, Thoreau, Schopenhauer, European thinkers, philosophers, all of them have felt the impact of this thought because it is just an analysis of your actual state of being, it is not a construct, it is not another philosophy or theory that is why this is so very powerful, it is a powerful aid towards self-development because it is just pointing you to the reality of yourself. So gather these clues together, think about them at some point of time and you will see each clue is true. In fact, your identification with other things, it is because of some amount of pressure on your mind due to some external factor, but this is the most obvious fact about yourself what is being discussed. Now we will go into after these clues let us go into this yoga meditation techniques we still have half an hour. So we can go into that. See before that I actually wanted to show you this when that discussion was going on. When I when we say the prism of your mind is responsible for your interpretation of reality. So, you see the universe is an interpretation of reality through the prism of your mind that white light is nothing but Brahman the ultimate reality. When it passes through your mind it appears as this diverse world this is what Vedanta will tell you this is the heart of Vedanta to understand how I am perceiving unity as diversity how I am perceiving the one reality as this kind of a world one consciousness what in its essential existence is consciousness itself existence itself bliss itself I am seeing as well enclosed in all so many forms so many names so many objects doing all sorts of things it is due to this the prism of my mind then once you transcend this prism you are able to overcome mind and transcend you will see only one thing you know in all this diversity not that the diversity vanishes for you, you see through it you see the one reality that is expressing itself in all these ways so this is what Vedanta tells you. Now, we will go into meditation, which is what she wanted and I think it is going to be very useful to all of you. See what is the process of meditation, you must understand the entire theory of it. This is actually from Yoga Sutras and from Vedantic meditation techniques. It is a sort of summary of what meditation is. See meditation means I meditate on an object, this is what happens in meditation, you are concentrating on an object at a particular level of consciousness. Now, when you meditate, you may be aiming at knowing the subject, knowing the I, then it is called a subjective meditation, you may be aiming at knowing the object then it is called objective meditation or you may just want to stabilize your mind attain calmness of mind then it is called a process meditation but always how do you meditate I meditate on an object your always that awareness will be there within you that you are concentrating on a particular object whenever you meditate keep this background in your mind. Now this has a definite term in Vedanta we call it Tripurti Jnan or in well in English you can call it a tripartite distinction in meditation which means there is always a meditator meditating on an object of meditation. Always there will be a subject meditating on an object, this it is very difficult to get rid of this tripartite distinction even in meditation only when you transcend this when you become one with the object you will be able to attain samadhi that is why this distinction has to be made and based on this we have different meditation techniques. Now look at this picture this slide you see meditation can be Vedantic or yogic these are the two main streams which are giving you the greatest meditation techniques all possible types of meditation. In the Vedantic meditation techniques, you have subjective or objective meditation techniques. Subjective now you know, when you want to know the subject, you see there are many people like this, they are not interested in knowing about this God or that God or whatever objective meditations, they first want to know who am I, me kohn hoon pehle, in fact this is the thirst within each one of you who am I first who will want to know something so it falls under subjective meditations there are number of meditations which will help you track your I they are subjective meditations then there are some people who are naturally inclined objectively I want to know this particular object I want to know this deity I want to a vision of God I want this I want that so for them objective meditations are there and yogic meditations are mainly to do with mind using subjective and objective techniques how to stabilize mind we will come to that first let's go into subjective Vedantic meditation techniques very important for you to know this just a man make a confusion now meditation cabaret me the very first technique is nididhyasana the common explanation of nididhyasana is it is a kind of atma vichar atma vichar apne suna hai na trying to know what the atman is who I am truly and the process is usually that Neti Neti process. Which means I am not the body, I am not just the mind, I am not the ego, I am not the intellect. Neti Neti you must have heard of it. Have you heard Nirvana Ashtakam? Watch it on YouTube, Nirvana Ashtakam is there. I am not this, I am not this, I am not this. I am not the man, buddhi, ahankar, I am none of the senses. I am nothing of this body. My real nature is chidananda rupa, shivoham, shivoham. So a number of, see this is a kind of meditation. Through the neti neti process, first you remove from your mind what you are not and then what you are will come into your mind. So all this comes under Nididhyasana. Okay it is a conforming the mental mode to reality is nididhyasana. This is actually many times nididhyasana techniques are recommended by this bhamati school. You may not be knowing about bhamati. See Advaita Vedanta has three main schools. They are called vartika, vivarna and bhamati schools. This is a special meditation technique of bhamati school Nididhyasan then the Koham technique who am I? Ramanmarshi's characteristic technique just by tracking this is the greatest clue actually to the presence of the Atman your eye sense if you keep it unidentified you can research into it, it will take you to its source what creates the sense of I in us is the reality of the Atman pure consciousness shining at the heart of your being is that that reflects in the mind and gives you this I sense they are researching into your real identity. So this is that meditation technique. The characteristic of this technique is it is a direct method. If the mind is purified enough, if the enquire is absolute, it will take you to your source. Just ask who am I? Keep the I unidentified, research into deeper and deeper the sense of as it goes deeper and deeper it is taking you towards your source you will see that. And you will come to the state of pure awareness, just the technique will lead you to that direct method, but not for all, hm some people will not know how it is to be done. Because usually the I of people is identified that is the problem. The third is Shabda Paroksha I do not know if you have heard this, this is also a very powerful technique it means just the utterance of Mahavakyas from the mind I mean from the speech of the teacher the guru puts the mind of the disciple into the state the state of Brahman the upper upper ocean of booty through Shabda is shoved the upper oaks you know what is upper ocean of booty the knowledge of the self not mediated knowledge unmediated knowledge of the self just through hearing of the Mahavakya's Mahavakya ka matlab hai there are some sentences in the Upanishads which just in one sentence they are giving you the actual truth about your own real nature about the Atman and Brahman there are four Mahavakya's actually, you must have heard in Aham Brahmas that's a Mahavakya Tattva Masi Chandogya Upanishad I told you the story of that that is a Mahavakya then I am Atma Brahma that is a Mahavakya Prajnanam Brahma that is a Mahavakya just in a very purified mind which is very keen on realization just the hearing of this you see just observe one of them like for example aham brahmasmi what is it telling you I am that Brahman so if the eye sense is very clear concept of Brahman may not be there initially this very eye sense will lead to that. Just the hearing of the Mahavakya can produce this effect. The caliber of the student should be like that. So it is a possibility. It is a technique. Then there are vidyas. These are actually the actual Vedantic meditation techniques, upasana techniques, very important techniques. There are number of vidyas, paradigms of Brahman you can say, paradigms for the ultimate reality. By meditating on a vidya, it leads to a certain expansion of your awareness naturally. There are number of vidyas. Ek baar mene yahaan par aapke seminar hall me madhu vidya had given in a talk on yoga. Madhu vidya is madhu vata aritayate madhuksharanti sindhavaha madhvirna santoshadhi madhunakta mutoshasi madhumadparthivagam rajaha madhu devarastu na pitha madhumanno vanaspati madhumagamastu suryaha. The rishi is telling everything is dripping with bliss he is in a state where he is seeing everything this vegetation this Sun these winds the oceans the waters the people around everything seems to be dripping with bliss because his state of mind is like that the state of his consciousness is so high this is how he is seeing the world this is a kind of vidya, in vidya if you meditate on the experience of the rishi something of that you can understand something of the experience comes into your mind so like this there are a number of vidyas in fact there is one called the hara vidya which is common actually these vidyas we have lost touch with these vidyas as a generation we have lost touch, but they put you into definite states of mind. Like for example, Dharavidya me kya kehate hain? Imagine a lotus like just now we meditated I had asked you to imagine a point of light in your heart in Dharavidya they asked you to imagine a lotus in your heart and think of the space an empty space within the lotus and think of the space within the space and imagine everything to be contained in that space agar is par meditation karo you get a sense of everything being in that chidakash chidakash ka matlabhe? that space where you will find consciousness you know there are three types of spaces in Vedanta where you are your body is just now living is thulakash the gross space this space only we understand there is a chittakash which means mental space where do your thoughts live? they live in mental space chitta akash it's called where does your consciousness dwell? it's in chitta akash and that's in your heart so this is a meditation on the heart through a symbol a lotus so vidyas are like this you know techniques paradigms given to you to internalize your consciousness and expand it to capture the vedic vision this is what Vidya means like this there are Shandilya Vidya, there is Akshara Vidya so many types of Vidyas are there sometime you may you can go through it is there distributed in the Upanishads then after the Vidyas are Aham Graha upasana techniques, you see the very word says what it means aham graha upasana, grasping the aham the eye, capturing your eye, what does it mean? Tracking what the eye means. So, in aham graha upasana techniques many times what is done is, you are sort of identified with something like just now you were identified with a point of light, is not it? Think of yourself as a point of light in your heart, this is the light of your awareness, I said this. So, what is actually being done here? You are being identified with maybe something like light or some other object and then that is actually tracking the real because you are you do not have a sense of yourself apart from body and mind you are given such a symbol you identify with that symbol like just now you identified with that point of light and as a result what happens it takes in internalizes your consciousness further and further you understand it will take you to the real sense of I separate from the object and separate from the body mind. So it is grasping the real self through a definite technique this is what aham grahopasana it is actually a subjective objective meditation ahamam Gopasana technique, then we go to the objective techniques, here you see meditation on Om, ye to aapko pata hai in some sense, many people do it also, if you just keep not just chanting Om, hearing Om, ye aapne try kiya hai kabhi, ek baar try karke dekho the magical effect it will have on you. It's not just chanting is meant so that at some point you are able to hear it. Om is always going on. The noise in your mind doesn't allow you to hear it. What this meditation will do for you is it will stop that noise. First you start with chanting Om. When it becomes powerful when you're absorbed in it, stop the chant you hear just hear the Om it will keep going on, Pranav Hamesha Chal Raha Hai, the clatter in our mind does not allow us to hear it, so stop your mind in some by some technique, so this is meditation on Om, then there is Pratik Upasana, using a symbol, you do it practical, practically also like Shaligram, Linga Puja, all this we do know, some form of symbol in order to, in order to again concentrate your mind and internalize, interiorize your awareness, all these techniques are used. concentrate your mind and internalize, interiorize your awareness. All these techniques are used. Many times the sun is used as an object of meditation. And you are so in pratikopasana, you superimpose attributes on the object. Like you think of the, maybe if it is meditation on the sun, you think the sun is full of these attributes, infinity, full of consciousness. If it is a pratik, a kind of a shalagram or something like that, you superimpose the attributes of Shiva or Vishnu on them. Any symbol you can take and superimpose attributes. What happens due to this is the attributes get imprinted on your own mind. Then meditation on natural objects you see just if you think of the vast ocean or the huge Himalayas your awareness will expand you feel a sense of if you are very concentrated you will even feel refreshed by it so this is also a meditation what you put your mind on is very important it is actually creating a vritti form in your mind that object and you are being influenced by it impacted by it so understand meditation is the way to change your mind it a powerful techniques so this is regarding Vedantic meditation in yogic meditation usually meditation is the way to change your mind. It is a powerful technique. So this is regarding Vedantic meditation. In yogic meditation, usually what is done is, you see it can be symbolic or non-symbolic, but yoga deals with mind, isn't it? They are using techniques to change your mind. Many times they are process meditations. Like for example, you see Rupa Dhyhyan you are concentrating on some particular holy object why are you doing that so that your your vritti becomes of that type mind par uska deep effect hota hai or guna dhyan when you meditate on the attributes of somebody some deity Vishnu these, that's why we have so many hymns we have, why? They are asking you to meditate on the attributes of God, he is such and such, he is all loving, he is all powerful, his nature is such, his beauty is such, why all this given to you? It will impact your mind, so guna dhyan is there, leela dhyan is there, leela dhyan aapko pata hai, thinking of the life of great people like if you meditate on the life of a person like Shri Ramakrishna or Swami Vivekananda those attributes will find place in your mind instead of doing just vedanta charcha you read the life of Shri Ramakrishna and see hum jo charcha kar rahe hain what we are talking about practical effect it has come in his life I can give you one incident here see once we are talking of expansion of awareness unity of existence and all this na once what happened Sri Ram Krishna was standing in his room in Dakshineshwar mein woh rahete the aapko pata hai? He was just standing in his room he was in a very high state of Samadhi and on the Ganga just beside the temple garden is Ganga there there a boatman slapped another boatman on the back the two were quarreling and he slapped him and the imprint of that slap fell on Sri Ram Krishna's back why he was identified with the whole of creation at that moment practical effect you will find in the lives of these great ones so if you do Leela Dhyan you will grasp the idea very well think of the life of great ones you must make it a habit to read the lives of great people they are that's the most inspirational literature you will get. They will it will just impact your mind especially at this age. So Leela Dhyan is important and then you have Pratima Dhyan. Pratima Dhyan of course you know meditating on idol or images that this also you see by doing all this what it is a kind of Rupa Dhyan only by doing all this again you are assuring a holy thought into your mind. Naam Jap, agar aap you think of the name of God repeat it in your mind it will clear your consciousness like anything do it and see these are all practical techniques name of God has that power so much of power is already associated with that name you know just now if I call you by your name how you immediately respond if I call somebody a donkey immediately what is the response names matter they impact your mind like that now the name of God is supremely powerful if you just chant the name of God it clears your consciousness like anything do it and see and you will understand the effect non-symbolic forms of meditation also are there nirakar dhyan jo hum kehte hain, again it is almost similar to vedantic meditations. Mainly in yoga they will concentrate on what are called system meditations which means the nature of your mind has to change. Subjective objective technique it may not be but the system of meditation, the meditating mind, the focus will be on that this I'm just giving you Vedantic and yogic techniques there are very many more techniques you must have heard of Vipassana in Buddhist meditation there are so many more techniques some techniques only focus on expanding awareness some on culturing awareness some on extracting awareness from the thought process some on heightening awareness at any rate all this also leads to that what I am trying to tell you is there are innumerable techniques pick up that which you can relate to immediately and will work for you what appears real to you what captures your mind is your path take up anyone kitne saare techniques hai aap dekhe and you can change your mind through these techniques that mind you apply to anything you will be successful there. Then I will give you some tips to meditation see here be very careful in understanding this how and where to meditate meditation is concentration of mind on a holy object at a higher center of consciousness it is not just concentration any form of concentration is not called meditation please see this confusion concentration of on a holy object at a definite point of consciousness about image of a meditating posture is there now you see what we mean by centers of consciousness should be clear in your mind they are points junctions in your own body if you commit pranayik energy to that particular junction it reveals a different awareness in your mind this is the connection between vital energy and awareness only in yoga you can capture that connection if you commit pranayik energy at specific points junction points in your body accordingly your awareness unfolds yoga psychology is telling you this now they care if you commit pranic energy only to the lower parts of your body only body consciousness will prevail if you committed to the heart center anahata jo hum kehte hai body consciousness will fall more and more you are becoming aware without identification with the body this is where you start feeling the joy of intellectual activity the joy of higher awareness if you commit pranic energy further than that systematically in a disciplined way yogically you will see more and more awareness is generated then you don't even need an object to keep you happy happiness just swells up from within you won't be able to control that happiness if you reach the highest you will be simply ecstatic without reason, without cause, without object, without the need for anything this is the whole scheme of yoga, if you are able to train your system so as to direct your pranayik energy pranayik energy ka matlab hai pran shakti jo hoti hai humare andar our vitality if it can be committed at definite points junctions you can unravel awareness to the highest degree this is the meaning isile meditation is no joke don't think I was simply concentrate my mind and somehow that is not called meditation it is a definite technique there's a definite mark part hey you see what important ideas they are giving you if you commit pranic energy at definite levels you can unravel awareness at to any extent to the highest extent even hmm chakra jo kete hai technically they are called chakras I don't want to go into all so many things are associated with these ideas today but the basic thing which you should know is if you learn to handle your own energies properly you can unravel consciousness to a very great degree which means you are in not just in charge of your body and mind you have reached the highest point of your true being it's right in your hands your liberation inbuilt within you this is what this is showing you so much me are a apple cash these vital points of yoga and giving you the very heart of yoga, if you go to books they will give you all sorts of things and all sorts of pictures and you must understand the essential aspect, science money, we are studying the science of happiness, the essential part of yoga you should understand, this is the essential part of yoga, you so handle your vital energies that you are able to unravel consciousness, body consciousness that is why I told you is not your real nature it doesn't even exist for you if you commit vital energies to higher points higher junction points you will see body consciousness simply falls higher joys are revealed to you you get joy absolute joy in what we are calling the joy of awareness, the joy of the expansion of awareness and consciousness this will become a reality for you, so a definite scheme you can systematically you have to train your system to go into it, then you see the next point I've given is holy objects have great sattvic impact on the mind. Why you are asked to meditate on a particular object? You have understood why it is important to meditate at a particular center of consciousness but why a particular object because holy objects have sattvic impact on your mind not just any object. Isiliye toh aapko object dete hain meditation ke liye hai na? So understand this you see different objects will have different types of impact on your mind so your focus should be directed towards specific objects especially in meditation. Just concentrating on something does not become meditation that is why and then devotion to these objects devotion itself leads to ecstatic joy this is the value of devotion you see we are studying the science of happiness the greatest happiness comes from things like bhava samadhi where devotion is raised to such a high pitch you are simply absorbed captured by the object of your meditation which is God so apne agar in santon ka life pada ho toh aapko ek idea aayega what kind of absorption is possible when Shri Ramakrishna used to go into bhava samadhi not only he used to become unconscious of everything for a long time he would radiate bliss tears of joy would stream down his cheeks, everybody around him would get captured by that, everybody around him felt that bliss, he simply radiated that level of bliss and joy, you know when the Buddha walked around for a radius of about two miles people could know the Buddha is somewhere around by the peace he radiated to ek vyakti mein yeh change ho jaye enormous changes are possible this is the way to change and transformation actually samajh mein aaraye a person who has manufactured these states of mind he's at the helm of change it is not just policies and administrators who make changes real power comes when you are able to bring your personality into in tune with the reality that is you that is what yoga and Vedanta is about agar apne ye points capture ke ho you would have a you will get a grip on meditation meditative practices. Understand the theory behind, understand how it is to be performed, some smart technique on a daily basis, 5 minutes you perform, you will see the impact on your mind. Your studies will be so much quicker, you know if you if you learn the art of focus, concentration, you do not have to spend so much time on every particular thing. You can handle any external factor after that. Today let us stop here because time is up.

 Music Om Asato Maa Sadgamaya Tamaso Maa Jyotir Gamaya Mrityor Maa Amritam Gamaya Om Shanti Shanti Shanti He Today we are going to study self discovery. So this is a profoundly important topic, how to discover the self this is what this course is actually about and we are going to that is why study some very intense techniques of yoga and Vedanta Dekhe yeh poora practical hai, hai na? Isko actually karna padega but since it's part of this course it the theory will be discussed in these lectures. Before you embark on anything like self-discovery, the fundamental thing required is self-discipline, is not it? Even if you want to simple concentration, simple achievements, you require certain amount of self-discipline. Now, in thismodule, we will be that is why discussing some forms of self-discipline which are commonly recommended. Kehte hai na thodi se tapasya chahiye in order to get this. Why do you need tapasya? What is tapasya first of all? Practice of self discipline so that your energies rise to a particular level, intensify, tap ka matlab hi hai to heat up which means to increase energy. So, if you bring your energies to a particular level, another dimension opens up for you. And this object of this tapasya, it is not something in the external world, is not it? It is that self which is illumining your mind, so that you can perceive objects in the external world. How will you know that, how to know the knower, how to know that due to which the perception is taking place, the source factor. So, you must get the ability to turn the mind inwards, just like how the senses can be turned inward. Yes, you can block perception by turning in the senses and so also you can turn the mind inward, because the object of the goal of your search is the self. So, self discovery is brought about by all these processes. Initially always what is suggested is a certain level of inner discipline so that you can successfully do this tapasya. Isiliye isko tapasya kehte hain, a way of turning inward. Now, in the yogic sciences it is called pratyak pravanata, which means the tendency of your mind to so turn inward that it interiorizes your consciousness. Your mental awareness becomes very clear and deep as it were, which means there is more intensity of awareness in your mind than merely the thought process. Thoughts are coming and going, you see in for most people they are not thinking, thinking is happening, this is their state, thoughts are going on whether they like it or not, whether they want it or not, thoughts are going on. But for you cannot afford to be like that if you have solid goals to achieve, your thought process should be in your hands, is not it? It should be well directed towards your purposes, your goals. So, initially what is told to us is a certain amount of inwardness of mind is required, so that your thought process becomes objective. Your thought is as much an object as anything else, you are getting mixed up with it that is the whole problem. So, if your thought process becomes a little objective, you see any yogic method will give you this as the first step, if it becomes if your thought becomes an objective process to you, you can handle it well. So, this is yeh pehla kadam hai, this is the way to interiorize your very awareness and intensify it. So, when this becomes a possibility, what is the experience you get? See let the usual example given in yoga is the example of a lake Vivekananda b example dete the. A lake imagine a simple lake, a lake which has very clear waters, you can actually see the bottom of the lake, is not it. But if the waves it is very wavy on the surface can you see the bottom of the lake or if the water is very turbid, unclean can you see the bottom of the lake you cannot see. So, two factors are required to see the crystal clear to see through the waters. What is required? Stillness is required on the surface of the lake and clarity of the water is required, it should be clean water. Then you can see the bottom of the lake, your mind is also like this. If there are not too many waves on the surface which means your thought world is well regulated, well controlled because you have managed to make thought an object, you are directing your thought process and the mind is relatively clean, the waters of the mind are clear, then you can see what is at the bottom. The yogic sciences will tell you the actual substratum of your mind is consciousness, mind is nothing, but thoughts bubbling upon a substratum of consciousness. So, if you remove those thoughts, awareness should remain over , but if if we just remove thoughts in our present state of mind, many times it is possible we fall asleep, isn't it? Because we have not cleared this mind, this this level of clarity has not come and it is very wavy on the surface also. So, these are the two reasons why we are not able to see the bottom of this lake. The very fact that your thoughts are in live and experiences for you shows that awareness is behind the thought process, it is involved in the thought process. So, if you are able to control thought you can reach that awareness, this is the simple equation of yoga. Mind is equal to thoughts plus consciousness. So, consciousness will be equal to mind minus thoughts this is yoga. So how to do this? Easier said than done. Is it so easy? It is difficult to do because of the restless nature of our mind. You know Vivekananda used to say the mind is like a crazy monkey. Already it is a monkey and then it is drunk and then it is bitten by a scorpion. How will that monkey be? Sometimes the mind behaves like that. It is so very difficult to control, but it is not impossible. If you have a strong will, if you are purposeful and goal oriented, nothing is difficult, is not it? So, even this process that we are discussing it is a perfect possibility with any of us if you learn the art of training the mind so yoga is the science which teaches you this it is that which teaches you how to bring your mind under control. Yoga ka matlabhi hai it is union, union of what? Union of the Jeevatman with the Paramatman Which means to say What you are calling yourself discovers the real you discovers the unchanging aspect of you the unchanging I which is nothing but the self pure consciousness So, the methodchanging I which is nothing but the self pure consciousness. So iske liye jo method hai usi ko hum yoga kehte hain. Now before I start into go into the technicalities, technical aspects of yoga, let me tell you the practical method to do this. You have already been been given a practical method, yes, I hope you are practicing it, do not skip it the practice is most important. The way up course all these concepts will become relevant to you otherwise they will appear like some philosophy which has no meaning to my life, the things become relevant when they enter your system. So, if you are practicing that 5 minute meditation, you can be sure you will relate to these concepts in a very big way. What happens, what is the fundamental requirement of yoga? The fundamental requirement is a certain stillness of your body and mind. See a yogi's characteristic feature is stillness, his behavior thought his very look his posture there it holds a certain amount of stillness why he is trying to quiet the system to see what is beyond so bringing a certain level of stillness and stability to your own personality will give you intense clarity of mind. Jahan chanchaliye hota hai, restlessness hota hai, their clarity will not remain. Everything gets mixed up. So this is the fundamental thing. If you want to improve your concentration, your focus, if you want to remain motivated by yourself all the time, you must learn to still your system so that the mind simply awakens to reality so to achieve this there are certain fundamental disciplines given to you in yoga apne yam aur niyam sune hai yam and niyam are the basic very simple disciplines given to you in order to achieve the stillness, the stability of body and mind and to be able to go into real yoga. Otherwise, it is a you know many things are passing for yoga today. So, without any discipline, without any commitment if you dive into it you will get a very little out of it, but if you do it as it is required to be done, you will get what you are seeking, what you have asked this course for you will get that. So, yam ka there are 5 disciplines in yam, the fundamentals of yoga. One discipline is the first one is what is called ahimsa, non-violence, a non-violent attitude of mind. You please check your thought process and see what you are calling negative thoughts, many of them are violence based, anger, hatred, jealousy, there are it is tinged with violence , you do not want it to happen, but it has become part of your thought process. So, removing this from your thought, isiliye then only positive states of mind are possible. So, when you remove himsa from your mind, mind fills up with positivity. Do not straight away ask what if the other person is doing himsa to me. If we are established in ahimsa person is doing Himsa to me. If we are established in Ahimsa, nobody can do Himsa to you. You know this is an important law in human life. If you are by nature loving and kind and all accepting, basically spiritual, nobody can do any great harm to you. It will just not occur to them. So, Ahimsa fundamental discipline of yoga is meant for this so that your mind achieves the stability required for yoga this is the first discipline second is satya which means commitment to truth in thought word and deed iska matlab hai what you say is what you think what you think is what you think, what you think is what you do. The three are not going in different directions. So this is satya, not just talking the truth, that is only the first step, but you mean what you say and you base your actions upon what you say and think. This is satya. The third is asteya, means non stealing. Now, do not understand this this is to be understood in a subtle way non stealing ka matlab hai in no way you try to build up a false ego. Your copyright stealing plagiarism all this is included in asteya. The tendency in research there is a huge amount of plagiarism. So, this tendency should not be there in the mind that is being established in Asteya which means I am not borrowing that knowledge or taking that thing which does not belong to me. I am not going to flatter my ego because I am in search of the truth about myself. So, this is an essential discipline of the mind. The fourth is brahmacharya. See this was fundamental to our education process in the past in the Vedic age. Why is this being recommended is because you keep your energies in your hands brahmacharya essentially means committing pranayika energy to the heart center when you do that what happens intense clarity remains you are in sort of free of body consciousness you have your entire mental powers in your hands so you can apply the mind to anything and you will be successful there. It is essentially retaining your energies in your hands. Without this discipline, your energies remain dissipated and it requires a lot of effort to gather them together. That is why this essential discipline of brahmacharya. There is another vital point here which yoga it's important for yoga. You see where you commit your vital energies according to that your awareness opens up. If your vital energies are committed only to the lower chakras to the lower centers only body consciousness will prevail. Even mind consciousness mental awareness is not, but if you commit them to the heart and above the heart, body consciousness falls away, only mental awareness remains and you go beyond even that higher dimensions of awareness will open themselves up to you. So, this art of committing vital energy to the higher centers was fundamental to any great achievement and the science of it is being given to you in yoga. It is actually a science retaining your energies in your hands and it is the it is the normal process of decent living. It is a way of living beyond mere body consciousness. So, this is another fundamental discipline stressed. Then you have aparigraha. Aparigraha means not accepting gifts. Why you know? It obligates you to the giver of the gift. When you take something from somebody, you develop a soft corner for that person. This way your mind which wants to get into states of yoga cannot be compromised, its energies cannot be compromised in this way. That is why you do not accept things from others, you can give as much as you can, but do not accept, this is another discipline. Then you have the Niyama set of disciplines, another five disciplines, the first one is Shoucha, essentially they are disciplines of your senses and your mind, Yama and Niyama. Shoucha is general cleanliness of body and mind. mind, then santosha contentment, if you know the art of contentment, if you have felt it you can be happy with very little, those who do not have contentment with a lot of things also they can be very unhappy, so these are all fundamental disciplines to remain in happy positive states of mind. Then there is tapas, we already discussed tapasya is turning the mind a little inward in whatever form you do it, tapasya, isiliye toh log kitna kuch karte hai na in the form of tapasya, some level of self-control they try to practice, so that your energies increase and then swadhyay is good study, self-study every day see you people study so much I know how your waking hours are occupied do you do any amount of elevating study every day? 5 minute ke liye bhi bhagavad-gita padna ya Vivekananda ko padna something from yoga, some scriptural study if you just did 5 minutes of study everyday consciously it will elevate your thought process it will clear your mind isilye svadhya itna important hai you dwell on a higher thought throughout the day through everything that you do whatever work you do in your room, in your classroom, in your lab there will be an undercurrent of this elevated thought. So, it helps you in various ways isilye a little amount of self study scriptural study every day. I would recommend to you there are small books thoughts of Vivekananda or Vivekananda's rousing message like the small books are there 10 rupees for 10 rupees very vibrant thoughts of Vivekananda you must at least give one or two books with you. Every day read just one thought and it will just hit you, it will help you even in developing concentration in gearing up your life towards success it will help you even in developing concentration in gearing up your life towards success it will help you. So, this swadhya you should keep up by yourself aisa nahi hai ki its part of the course. So, I have to do it after the course I will stop it aisa nahi hai its its a its part of your life now. Then Ishwar pranidhanatvaat, Ish pranidhan, it essentially means surrender to God, surrender to the higher power, whatever you are doing, it finally make it an offering to the divine, in whatever way you want to do it. But if you only attribute things to your ego, it will take you away from the path of yoga, that is why this discipline is there. See naturally they are giving you small disciplines which will keep your mind very stable. certain depth will come into you you will become a natural leader you know everybody will look up to you if you maintain these standards of basic living you see small disciplines but you develop a mind which is very high very great capable of all achievement. So, this is these are the fundamentals of yoga what I told you. Now we will go into the actual technical concepts of yoga. Yog ka matlabhi hai, I told you, it is uniting with the real you, uniting your mind with who you really are. Technically, in the language of the philosophy of yoga, it is called separating purusha and prakriti because purusha is the self, right, and prakriti is, in your system it is called separating Purusha and Prakriti because Purusha is the self right and Prakriti is in your system it is the mind. These two have got mixed up, isn't it? Awareness you are not able to know understand anything by pure awareness, you understand something by mental awareness. Awareness has got invested with the mind process and your thoughts are so dominant the psychological reality only has become dominant in you existential reality is not there in your experience because thoughts have overpowered you you are not in charge of your thoughts. So, in yoga language we say separating Purusha and Prakriti which means separating awareness from mind. So, yog is actually vyog between purusha and prakriti right. So, this is the aim. Now how do they do this? For this there is a basic scheme and there is an advanced scheme. There are four padas in yoga sutras. I am not going to go into that because you only need the essential information, we do not have the time here also and your syllabus is such. I will give you the essential points in all theseprocesses hm. Catch hold of that the the most essential thing is to dive into yoga, not just to know about it. It is not another thought process that you should leave with. After this course, you must develop the meditative mind, then the purpose of the course is achieved. Whether you know this theory or not, the videos will be with you, but you must develop a meditative mind that is the purpose of a course like this. So, they care the basic scheme of yoga, what is it going to tell you? Let me show it to you on this slide here. See the basic scheme of yoga, Purusha and Prakriti when they come together, the first what is it that they generate? They generate avidya. Avidya ka matlab hai, I told you, you are not able to capture the real I that is supposed to be the root of all suffering ignorance, ignorance of who I truly am why because mind and self have got united and I think only in terms of mind I have no idea of what self means what this purusha they are talking of I have no idea of it I don't know what awareness consciousness means you see this is the normal experience of a mind which is not trained in yoga you do not know what the Purusha means you only know the psychological reality which is going on like a high-level drama in your mind all the time henna you close your eyes you see only thoughts booming up emotions thoughts all this going on in the mind. So, when these two come together they are mixed up together avidya is the result ignorance is the result this is the first thing that yoga will tell you this is the root cause for all suffering when you do not know who you actually are you get mixed up with the mental process. So, when there is anger in the mind you are anger itself you are like an atom bomb ready to blast blow up and blow up the people around you also. So, this is due to avidya you do not know who you actually are you are totally identified only with prakriti only with the thought process in your mind. This avidya is the root of all suffering they will tell you. So, what does it lead to you see the slide it leads to kleshas avidya is the first klesha the first root of the tree of suffering and it leads to the next place Klesha is called Asmi Asmita which means it gives you a false sense of self individuality. Asmita means actually you have a sense of yourself not based on reality on the reality about you it is based on your psychological drama that is Asmita a sense of individuality which is not real. So, it it pricks you, it causes you harm, it gives you pride, it gives you arrogance ah. They are all the products of this asmita and as a result it will generate rag dvesh attachment and aversion. These are the next two kleshas, there are five kleshas totally. Rag and dvesh means you know there are two sides of the same coin, attachment and aversion. Because of your false sense of ego, which the Smita has built up, you are constantly have strong, you have strong likes and dislikes, you are attracted to certain things, you hate certain things, you analyze any problem in your life all these factors are working your hate, your anger, your ego, your pride, your arrogance without in without being in touch with your reality all the psychological drama is taking place in the mind. So, what are the kleshas we just now covered avidya, then asmita, raag, dvesha, the last one is abhinivesh, which means deep rooted fear of death. This there in everybody, when you do not know what death is, there will be a kind of deep rooted fear. It is actually the fear of non-existence. It is the fear of what if I cease to exist. You are happy to change bodies. Please know this. Even in dreams sometimes you get another body and you may be very happy with it. But you are frightened of the break or absence of awareness. Non-existence is the actual thing you are frightened of. So, all these are rooted in what? Avidya. You do not know who you truly are that is why all this comes fear, hatred, arrogance, pride, false sense of individuality, egoism, all this is playing in the mind. Now, this leads to tremendous suffering, abhi aap bahut chote ho when you grow up a little even if you have a 6 figure salary, a 40 room house, a great family you can be terribly suffering people who have had all this many of them have committed suicide, celebrities commit suicide, why? The cause for this kind of a suffering is internal, it is existential please see, it is not external, you have everything in the outer world, but the mind has is over powered by all these negativities, deeply suffering mind, depression constantly, suicidal tendencies. So, isko overcome karne ke liye hi hai Ashtang Yoga to put your mind into order to get rid of all this kleshas based on avidya and attain the purpose of yoga. So, what is Ashtang Yoga? This is the most common format of yoga given to you. Anywhere you go to learn yoga this Ashtang 8 steps of yoga of yoga given to you. Anywhere you go to learn yoga, this Ashtang 8 steps of yoga will be told to you. The first two steps I already covered Yam and Niyam, they are the fundamentals of yoga. After that comes Asana. Asana is actually the seat, your posture, because when you sit for meditation, your posture is very important. It includes keeping how you maintain your physical body, keeping your spine straight, it is very important for concentration. There are certain simple techniques regulating your breathing, that is the next step pranayam. Having proper breathing is very important to controlling mind, they can take that as a bat now or take that as a breathe Karna such simple steps, they usher you into a very calm focus state of mind. So these are the next two steps asana and pranayama regulating your posture and regulating your breathing after that is pratyahar, Pratyahar means withdrawing the mind. Ye sab thoda bahut aapne kiya hai, isliye you are interested in this course. Pratyahar is withdrawing the mind from too many objects and too many thoughts, withdrawing it in degrees, step by step. After that comes dharana ability to maintain one continuous thought flow. Like you see if you pour oil from one cup to another there is a continuous flow is not it without break usiko dharana kehte hai. You are capable of this state dharana where there is one continuous thought flow then it acquires enormous power and that leads to dhyan. Dhyan is the next stage in Ashtang Yoga. It means you are absorbed in your object of meditation. Dhyan itself means such a level of intense concentration that you get absorbed in your object of meditation. Dhyan magna ho gaye. Then the next stage is Samadhi. This is the stage where actually you are united with the object of meditation. Samadhi means actual oneness with the object of meditation. Samadhi means actual oneness with the object of meditation so this is almost a transcendental state where you acquire complete knowledge of the object now our objective in yoga is what is the object the self the supreme self the subject is the object here isn't it so Samadadhi hum tabhi kehte hai when you are riveted, when the mind is riveted to that self, it has merged into it. This knowledge you know, it can only be expressed as knowing by being. Because it is knowledge of your own being, knowledge of the real real I you become one with it you know by being it is not knowing something objectively easily if you are absorbed in mathematics how much go Samadhi naked they queue you have not become the mathematical problem or solution in yoga you you actually because it is research into your being right there is no objective process here you become that being and becoming is the word Vivekananda used Brahma with Brahmaiva bhavati is used by Upanishads what they mean to say is you you become united with the object of your meditation which is the self here that is the state of Samadhi now is called yoga shastra Samadhi matram kehte which means it is just the first stage of Samadhi it it is not the ultimate, not the final thing of yoga. What does this Samadhi do to you? It ushers you into the advanced state. See without going into this state of Samadhi, you can understand nothing of this advanced scheme of Patanjali Yoga Sutras. But some amount of peripheral knowledge I will give you, so that because we are going into the technicalities of yoga, technical technical aspects so something you will know about it but this is to be experienced yeh koi aise teaching ki baat hi nahi hai but a general plan is being given to you to motivate you towards these higher levels states of awareness Samadhi ushers you into Sampragnath Yoga. Look at that slide there. Samadhi ushers you into Sampragnath Yoga which means yoga based on prajna. As a result of samadhi because the focus the goal of samadhi is the self your prajna the level of awareness will be complete intense very high. So, it is a yoga based on this higher prajna and that leads to what is called ritambara prajna which means an intuition based on the truth the truth of pure consciousness of the nature of the purusha that is Ritambara Prajna. A Prajna an intuition based on the truth of your true being, you get sort of a kind of knowledge and Abhas of the Purusha who you truly are. Ritambara Prajna when practiced generates what is called Vivek Khyati which means you are now able to separate awareness and buddhi. See, this is virtually impossible to do in our present state of mind. How will you separate yourself from your buddhi? How can you separate awareness from buddhi? But in this state you can do it. That is why it is called Vivek Khyati, the very peak of discrimination where you are able to separate awareness from the buddhi, intuition from the intuitor and this leads you to asam prajnaat yog which means even the prajna generated here is suppressed as it were so that you awaken into complete consciousness. See this stage it is impossible to understand in these terms, in our normal terms, yogo yogena jnatavyo, yogo yogat pravartate, you can know yoga only through yoga and you proceed in yoga only through yoga, not through three dimensional, two dimensional teaching like this, you have to do it to know it so this leads to the stage of Kaivalya which is complete separation of Purusha and Prakriti which means you know the self in its true nature Prakriti mind has got separated from Purusha from the self you know yourself and you are you are that in that state you enter into your true state of being which is the state of pure consciousness this is the yogic method according to Patanjali Yoga Sutras to attain to self knowledge starting from those preliminaries which we discussed it culminates in the separation of Purusha and Prakriti and the complete knowledge of the Purusha of the self the real I pure consciousness that you are it culminates in this knowledge this is called Kaivalya. So you see you are liberated from what from the mind is not it, it was mixing up with the mind that was giving you all the ignorance, all the bondage, because then this mind will create thought, it will create the world of sensations, it will project this world, the world will impinge upon your mind as it were, because you have created the mechanism for taking in that data. You are destroying that mechanism, you are destroying the mind as it were removing the mind so that the real you remains over which is pure consciousness so it is liberation liberation from what essentially from prakriti from the mind remember bondage is only in the mind liberation is that is why only in the mind it is not in the self Vedanta will give you this tremendous insight, the self was never in bondage, it was this mixing up of Purusha and Prakriti. Vedanta will in fact tell you Prakriti is unreal, you thought you got mixed up. So, it is sort of an advancement over yoga, the scheme of yoga, which Vedanta Vedanta tells you thought you got mixed up with mind you were always the self so what we just now discuss is the yogic method to reach self knowledge now what is the proof for all this are there people who have attained this yes there are number of people who have attained this. Have you heard about Ram Krishna Paramhamsa's life? You have heard about him, right? He was a man who was constantly in Samadhi. That's why we take him to be God. Who was constantly in the state of complete union with the Self. In fact, we have three photos of Sri Ram Krishna. All three photos have him in Samadhi. Yeah, this was his perpetual state of mind. One day you know, amongst the people who used to visit him, there was one doctor called Dr. Mahendra Lal Sarkar. He wanted to test this Samadhi. What is the proof? How can a man go into such a state and again come out of it? So he went to Sri Ramak Krishna equipped with a stethoscope and with his friends he wanted to test him so while talking about God Shri Ram Krishna went into Samadhi and then this doctor went caught hold of his hand and felt his pulse. He felt his pulse there is no pulse he checked his heartbeat no heartbeat then he went so far as touching his eyeball he put his finger into slightly the eyes would be open when Sri Ram Krishna would be in Samadhi many times so he he touched the eyeball no reaction the whole being has withdrawn somewhere and he said that medical science has no explanation for this. And this man who you see apparently it appears like where he has gone, he is radiating bliss, radiating supreme peace. After a long time he comes back into the normal state and exuding bliss as it were it affects all around him exuding light from that frame and his words only supreme knowledge comes out of that mouth where did he go and where did he come back seeing this the doctor and his friends were so stunned they said that this really science has no explanation to this. This is a complete science in itself, but this is a possibility with the human experience that you can go into a state where you get in direct touch with reality and you stay in that state and bring knowledge from that state. So, these yogic sciences have developed from these states, do not think that this is these are thought constructs written by thinking. Hamare philosophies aise nahi frame kiya gaye the. They are born out of an meditative experience, they are born out of realization. So that is why this yoga is so powerful, if you follow the technique you will get the goal, as much as you will follow that much you will get, it is like that. Once you know Vivekananda also pined for this realization of Samadhi and when he was a young man like any of you he would go to Sri Ram Krishna at Dakshineshwar he was a college student at that time and he would beg him give me that state once so once actually in Kashipur when he was in Kashipur garden house he attained that state and when he went into the state of Nirvikalpa Samadhi he started asking where are my hands and feet I don't feel my body full consciousness is there but no awareness of the external instrument the mind has withdrawn completely from there later on while describing it to his one of his disciples Sharad Chandra he would say you know this this dual mode of thinking I am Brahman or I want to realize Brahman that itself vanishes only Brahman reigns pure consciousness reigns in that state everything else this diversity multiplicity of this world becomes like one homogeneous mass and appearance in that consciousness. So, the actual experience of Yoga Vedanta has happened in many lives and so this is no theory, it is a method of going into the heart of reality, the reality about the human being itself. So, this is the great yogic science which we are introducing you into here everything depends on practice as I told you. Now these are the yogic techniques to go into reality, awareness or consciousness. Vedanta also you know Vedanta is another philosophy which we discussed initially hm they started as philosophical systems, but they are based on as I told you very solid techniques Vedanta has its own methods to go into this reality it also has upasanas it also has vidyas ahamgraha upasana techniques you might have heard of this grasping the eye ways of doing it but Vedanta also has insight meditations which means you can if you are prepared if the mind is prepared you can go directly into the truth it does not even require a method that is also a possibility. See there are so many ways of going into this truth this is what we are telling you. Shankaracharya you know the 8th century philosopher who established Advaita he in fact he did not believe in any spiritual experience not based on Shruti. So to a certain extent he denied the yogic sciences although many times he has used them he talks about it he talks about yogic techniques also but in a way he believed that the Shruti scriptural evidence of the Vedas is very important for going into the heart of reality so he bases his Vedanta his understanding of Vedanta on plainly on the Shruti on the Vedas on the Upanishads so we will go into some of these techniques now. Here I would like to mention the path of self-enquiry. The path of self-enquiry, it is the direct path. If you just enquire in a very clear state of mind, you will immediately be convinced of certain very basic truths about awareness. You will be introduced into what awareness means and if the mind is fit enough, it will the very enquiry will take you there. This is a perfect possibility. See we are going to try it right here. How certain basic pointers or clues you can say can lead you to the conviction of the self right here we are going to try it. This is actually based upon ah there are scriptures called prakarana granthas which means accessories or auxiliary scriptures auxiliary to Vedanta they help you understand Vedanta better. So, there are number of such scriptures which Shankaracharya wrote and in his commentaries there he has put a number of these kinds of techniques. In your everyday thinking using your everyday thought process you can come to an understanding of the self of the reality of the self. So, we will just try a few techniques here. The power of Vedanta, sit straight all of you. This is reasoning based on existential truth. It leads to existential awareness. It is a kind of reasoning which will help you come to a particular conclusion about the self. See just now you have to think whatever I tell you very clearly in your mind, just now think about it, you have a sense of I which is unpunctuated by time. What I mean by this is, you have been a very small baby, you have no memories of that state, you have been a toddler, you have been a teenager, today you are a young person. The same I is persisting, but body and mind have changed absolutely, right. How come the same I is there, when what you call personality, body and mind has completely changed which means there is something in you which is unpunctuated by time and space which continues which is constant your eye sense how much ever the external changes how much ever your thoughts change your memories change your body consciousness changes but that eye persists the same I will become an elderly person will become an old person one day it will fall the body will fall the I continues even now your sense of yourself is not body based your sense of yourself is not even thought-based you know they are your thoughts you know it is your body not you the body your body not you the thought your thought right suppose some beautiful emotion comes into your mind you suddenly felt happy it is my emotion I felt happy it is it was my thought not I the thought your experience is always like this you are experiencing the thought you are experiencing the emotion, you are experiencing the body. Right? It's in your experience just now. Samajh mein aaya hai? There is a sense of I in you separate from the body and your thoughts, your mind. You are aware of the body. Is the body aware of you? Think and tell me. Does the body ever say, I am aware of you? Think and tell me. Does the body ever say I am aware of this individual? You are aware of the body. If I raise my hands, I am aware I raise my hands. My hands are not aware of me, isn't it? If I close my eyes, I am aware I closed my eyes. My eyes are not aware of me or that they were closed I am aware of the body which means what awareness belongs to the subject not to the body I am aware of my thoughts means what awareness belongs to the subject I not to my thoughts I am aware of my emotions I am aware of my emotions. I am aware of this feeling in my mind. You are aware of perfectly aware of everything happening in your mind, which means you are apart from your mind, you are apart from your thoughts, you are apart from body consciousness. It is a matter of will whether you identify with this or not, whether you identify with your thought or not, it depends on your will. You want to identify whether you identify with this or not whether you identify with your thought or not it depends on your will you want to identify you identify you don't want to identify you don't identify you remain apart this is your normal experience yaan koi yog nahi chal raha hai this is the way you are perceiving things and reality you have not observed it this way that is all. One more thing let me tell you here see you are a composite of many parts this body, this body is composed of many organs they are all working independent of you do they take your permission does the is the heart pumping blood with your permission or the lungs functioning with your permission the liver no they are doing their own job you were not even aware of a liver or pancreas or lungs until medical science told you your sense of yourself is always apart from the body. This is what I want you to observe. When you take up another body, say in a dream, you do not mind it that much as long as your sense of awareness persists. You know, without referring to this physical body your existence continues as your dream proves and you don't mind it you're happy with it so actually you are only awareness this is your experience even right now functioning through this body-mind complex you got mixed up because you never thought Vedantically you got mixed up started identifying with this and because the whole world is always telling you, you means this. So, you feel this is I it is a kind of Adhyas superimposition, but your own experience of anything is always your objectively experiencing it so you are the subject in your awareness it is getting experienced isn't this true Abhi abhi aap soch ke dekho right now you will acknowledge this is true so this is basically what Vedanta is telling you that you are indeed awareness functioning through a body mind complex. Another point let me tell you, see you pass through these three states of they work with only this much data, you see they had no great instruments to track anything, but your own experience what does it tell, this is the characteristic phenomenological method. Your own experience what does it tell you about yourself? You pass through waking state, dream state and deep sleep state. Now, the wonderful thing about these three states is you are able to say something about all three states. Waking state is when the mind is active, senses are active, right, just now we are in that state. When you go into dream, when you fall asleep and you dream something, your senses are closed in that state, but the mind is active. From your subconscious mind, you are spinning a dream and getting totally involved with it, right. In your dream, you do not think it is a dream, it is something real when you wake up you say it is it was a dream right. Then in the deep sleep state so, you are able to recollect your dreams also. In the deep sleep state what happens senses are closed mind is also closed, but you say you experienced happiness, restfulness and you did not experience objects. So, somebody was there to say you did not there was lack of experience of objects. So, it is an experience of absence, it is not an absence of experience, you are experiencing the absence of objects right, you are experiencing that is why you are able to tell that in that state I did not experience objects and the state of restfulness it gives you. So, you were there subliminal consciousness in some way intuited the absence of objects and the presence of restfulness, the experience of restfulness which means you were very much present. There is one invariable passing through three variable states of waking, dream and deep sleep that invariable is the self awareness persisted through all these three states. That is why they are states of your mind. You the self always exist, the three states as it were pass over you. See your own daily experience is pointing out to the presence of the self within you. If you catch this logic this basic logic it comes in the Mandukya Upanishad that much alone is enough Mandukya eva alam they say this one thing alone is enough it will strike you and tell you that this is the fact about human life how did I miss this out because Vedantic knowledge was not there. Nobody pointed this out to us. All that Vedanta does for you is it will tell you learn to think this way. This is the fact of your experience. Kabhi kisi ne apne upar hi itna ghabir research kiya hai? This is research on yourself you are researching everything under the sun even above the sun but you have not researched yourself not gone deep into yourself so this is a science which gives you this introduces you to your real self through these mechanisms one more simple thing I will just point out see if it makes sense to you. See now suppose I say concentrate or pay attention you will at once become alert it requires effort on your part. If I say well think of this particular thing again you will apply effort. See to pay attention you require effort, to focus you require effort, to think you require effort, to feel you require effort, just to be self aware do you require effort. Because you are aware you are thinking, you are feeling, you are willing, awareness is primary is the primary thing about you, in that awareness there is mind function. So, all these faculties of thinking, feeling and willing. It is so obvious in your own experience that is why awareness requires no effort. The only thing required is be still and know who you are which means actually distance yourself from the mind which is constantly busy otherwise it will drag you into its ways. So, self-awareness is always there in that awareness you are perceiving before you go into your perceptions acknowledge this fact this is the simple thing which Vedanta is telling you. So, there are a number of such clues or pointers which tell you truth is always as it is you do not have to add anything to it, you do not have to extract it from somewhere. Realization itself means knowing something which already is. So, you just realized it that it is there not creating it see please see if you created it if you made it up it would be unreal if it is already there I came to know of it now then it is realization it was always there I my mind was not sensitive to it it had closed itself to this truth, now it has opened up so I realize this truth, Vedanta is like that, you just open up, wake up to reality that is all, last time I had told you the story of waking up from the dream, the tiger story you remember, you just wake up to the facts, basic facts of life. You know this process of self-enquiry is so powerful there are people who have woken up to the reality of self just through self-enquiry just through the this these clues they have woken up to the reality you have heard of Raman Maharshi? Some of you have heard. See, he was a great sage of Thiruvannamalai, Tamil Nadu, who just realized the self through inquiry at a very young age, at the age of 16, as a young boy. You know how he realized? It is so remarkable, just observe this carefully. He was a young lad sitting and studying in his home in Madurai. Suddenly in his mind the fear of death came very intensely into his mind, a violent kind of fear. He thought what is death and then he tried to enact simulate death he laid down and try to feel what it means to die and you know actually that act and the ripeness of his soul actually generated a kind of mystical experience for him then and there which means he felt his body to be completely ah sort of removed of vitality, but yet his sense force of his personality his eye sense is throbbing like anything. Vitality pranaikshakti is being withdrawn from the body, but his eye sense is unchanged the full force of his personality even the ahamsphuran what is called the eye sense is unchanged the full force of his personality even the ahams furan what is called the I sense is throbbing within him in his own words he says I understood all this directly even without the thought process this became a matter of simple direct perception for me even without too much thought he says that I exist always even when the body is not there so his death experience actually led him to self realization later on he would say you know each of his words will hit you if this kind of an awakening comes he says your existence is evident with or without the body, your existence is evident with or without thought, you exist so you are thinking, you exist so body consciousness can come but your existence is self-evident, you are functioning through body and mind but never identified with it unless you will it. And he used to say this self-knowledge because he had self-knowledge immediately right there, he used to say this will always persist no matter what you are doing. It is like that Shruti, you know the monotone in Indian classical music, there is a Shruti which you hold on to before you sing the different notes. He used to say this self is the monotone which will exist which is always there no matter what other notes you are singing. This self is that monotone it is the common denominator of all your experiences. It is the common denominator of all your experiences. It is the common denominator ever existing reality before anything else comes up, before your thought begins, before your will begins, before your perceptions and sensations begin, because you are aware the rest of it is going on. So, you see a simple simulation of death and self enquiry led him into of course, he is no ordinary person to get the experience then and there and to remain in that experience all through his life. So, that was Raman Maharshi. So, there are people there are great examples right in front of us this path of self-enquiry is so direct it takes you directly into it why is it called the direct path is called technically it is unmediated experience see for normal perception last session we discussed normal perception you need so many factors for the object to become perceptible, what all do you need? You need the object to throw out light at you right that is the first thing. Then you require your senses to be in order, then the inverted image on the retina should fall, then the electromagnetic radiation is converted into your neurochemistry taken into your brain, the thalamus filters it and takes it to your visual cortex. This this entire apparatus is required for you to perceive that thing as that object. This knowledge self knowledge is unmediated, you just know it by insight. None of these factors is required, because it is knowledge of the self which is illuminating the mind so that you can have perception. You just know that is all you can say about it full stop nothing more can be said about it which means it is a state from where your mind will come back unable to reach along with speech it cannot be reached through mind or speech you just go into that you just touch reality there that is all it is a deep level insight which translates into a kind of mystical experience in your system. So this is how ordinary perception and self-knowledge are distinguished. You see paroksha anubhuti means ordinary perception and aparoksha anubhuti is self-knowledge. In paroksha anubhuti you require a vritti. We discussed this in the last class. A modification of your mind should occur for the perception to take place. In Aparoksha Anubhuti, please see, no vritti is required. The entire self-enquiry is on the aham pratyaya, the I sense in you. So, no modification of mind, no mind is required. The medium of perception here was dense, cluttered in Paroksha Anubhuti the medium here is absolutely clear and hence becomes like a mirror you know when the mind is absolutely clear it will not function like a lens but like a mirror it will show you the thing as it is it will not deflect or reflect light it will become like a mirror then in paroksha anubhuti normal perception awareness invested is minimal because the awareness has got mixed up with the thought process and thought is dominating. But here a paroksha anubhuti awareness invested is complete what we mean to say by this is not that awareness is invested with the thought process, awareness is complete in complete full bloom in itself with in that awareness you are perceiving reality as it is without the interference of the mind. So, you should actually not call it invested awareness it is awareness in itself and finally, that is why this is mediated knowledge paroksoksha anubhuti, because so many factors are required for the generation of that knowledge, but aparoksha anubhuti does not require mediation of anything, you just know. That is why this is the glory of atma vichar or what is called self-enquiry, it is not mere manan thinking, it seeks to find the foundations of self-awareness by penetrating into the immediate and incontrovertible experience of one's existence as the ego the I sense if you penetrate into that you reached self-knowledge it is an intuitive process leading to direct mystical experience this is the process of self-enquiry the Vedantic process now based on this there are many techniques I told you the aham grahopasana eye grasping techniques they all lead to Aparoksha Anubhuti there is another one technique which I would just mention here we don't have too much time I'll mention here that is also a direct path leading to self-knowledge self-discovery that is also a direct path leading to self knowledge, self discovery that is what is called Shabda Paroksha, even Shankaracharya uses it, the Upanishads have certain cryptic statements called Mahavakyas, great statements you can say, which directly lead to this level of discovery, that is self knowledge, if they are heard from the lips of a man of realization, these Mahavakyas. So they are actually scattered in the Vedas, in the Upanishads. I will just show you these Mahavakyas here, Prajnanam Brahman, it actually means Prajna, your awareness is in its purest form it is Brahman, pure consciousness. This comes in the Aitareya Upanishad of the Rig Veda. The next Mahavakya is Ayam Atma Brahma, this self, Atman is verily Brahman. This comes in the Mandukya Upanishad of the Atharva Veda. Tattvamasi, though art that, this comes in the Chandogya Upanishad of the Samaveda and aham brahmasmi, I am Brahman comes in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad of the Yajurveda. So in the four Vedas you have these four Mahavakyas, these are statements which can directly lead to because if you actually see the words there prajna brahman atman if you have awakened to the truth about these a word is a symbol referring to something is not it indicative of some particular object of experience if that is already awakened it will lead directly to the truth about brahman. So these are statements which directly lead to the truth it is called Shabda Aparoksha, Shabda used for Aparoksha Gnan, Aparoksha Anubhuti and this is another important method used by Vedanta for getting self knowledge. So, like this there are a number of methods through which the Vedic Rishis arrived at self discovery in the Shweta Shwetar Upanishad you know there is this wonderful declaration by a Rishi telling you his about his realization. I will just give you that and conclude today's session. He says look how powerful the words are. The Rishi is saying, Shrunvantu Vishwe Amritasya Putra, Aaye dhamani divyanitastu, Vedahametam purusham mahantam, Adityavarnam tamasa parastat, tameva viditva atimrtyumeti, nanya pantha vidyataya naya utthishthata jagrata prapya varannibodhata which means to say shunvantu vishwe, oh listen all ye children of immortal bliss amritasya putra, he doesnt call us sinners doesnt call us confused minds he says you are children of immortal bliss you know this expression even vivekanda used in the US when he was lecturing there children of immortal bliss even those who are in the higher spheres aye dhamani divyani tastu vedaham etam purusham mahantam the Rishi is saying I have known this great one this purusham mahant, this great Purusha Adityavarnam, this luminous being Tamasa Parastha, beyond all darkness Tameva Viditva Atimrtyumeti This is the way to get over death, to overcome death, to get over our mortality Nanya Pantha Vidyate Ayanaya There is no other way other than knowing the truth about your true being that is why Uthishtha, Jagratha, Prapya varanibodhata that is why stand up, awaken yourself to this knowledge and get the supreme blessing of life Vivekananda made it into arise, awake and stop not till the goal is reached. Hainna, ye suna hainna vivekananda ka derived directly from the Upanishads. Please see this level of knowledge and discovery is available to you if you would strive for it. Let us end today's session here. session here.
 . Om Asato Maa Sadgamaya Tamaso Maa Jyotir Gamaya amritam gamaya, om shante shante shante he. Today's session is on self-management. Self-management as you have been hearing for the last few sessions, human personality, we consider it to be body, mind and self the Atman. Essentially the self manifesting or functioning through a body mind complex. So, there is no managing self, the self is actually managing everything because of its presence the body and mind are enlivened, illumined and so they are functioning. So, essentially self-management means management of body-mind complex. So, this is what we will be discussing in detail and of course, we will be discussing also how the discovery of the self which means self- self knowledge, how it helps you better manage your mind, mental capacities, your thoughts, emotions, will, attitudes, motivations all of this and also your body. Especially the diseases of the body, the limitations of the body, how to manage if we allow the light of awareness to stream into these portions, they get rejuvenated as it were renewed. So, this is how self-knowledge helps in the management of body and mind. We will be discussing all of this. As I have told you always the seat of your experience is entirely within you. You are the experiencer because you are aware experience is taking place. That is why you have the power in you to subordinate thought to awareness, you have the power in you to subordinate feelings to values, you have the capacity to subordinate compulsive behavior to conscious behavior, it is you are at the helm of change, you can lead the kind of life you want, but all this becomes possible if you awaken to the reality within you. Otherwise, it is very easy to develop compulsive habits. What is the meaning of compulsiveness? You are controlled by an external factor, you are compelled to do something, you are not doing it out of your will, you have so programmed yourself that you have to do it, this is compulsiveness. So, we can make ourselves compulsive human beings or conscious human beings. The more you awaken self-knowledge within you, what happens is the mind becomes more conscious, intensified awareness is generated in the mind. Using that as a light you can do everything, you can manage your mind and of course, the body-mind mechanism. But if this is not awakened, we can get into very compulsive habits, completely dedicated to something which will which is supposed to keep me happy, completely dependent on something to keep me engaged. So, this situation can come if we have not awakened to this reality within and learn to use it in our everyday life. So, essentially self-management is about this. I was going through certain self-management is about this. I was going through certain self-management textbooks and this portion is lacking entirely. Although you have such a huge scriptural heritage behind you, ah we have sort of not been able to draw the essential ah aspect of self-management which is ability to open to the reality of your being in order to handle your body mind complex. So, this we will be studying today as part of this session. First of all let us come to the external aspect of your being which is the body. Here I am going to give you certain ideas which you will not find in medical science. All the knowledge available to us which medical science gives us is already you have access to it, it is on the net and you can also go into it deeply. But here I am going to give you certain thoughts which you will not find anywhere which are characteristic of the Yoga Vedantic stand hm. Like for example, you know in Ayurveda in ah the science of health which was developed here the indigenous science of keeping the body healthy, they characteristically distinguish two types of diseases. What is ah what is the meaning of disease? Dis-ease is disease, when you do not feel at ease, you feel ah no calmness, nothing keeps you happy that is disease, it can be physical or mental. Now, diseases are of two types, one is called according to Ayurveda, one is called Nijaroga, another is called Agantuk roga. Neja roga means ah disease caused by imbalance in your in the internal factors which is self created in a sense hm and agantuk roga means the an imbalance created by external factors. So, what the science of ayurveda prayik healing, reiki all these alternative forms of medicine will tell you primarily is a lot of your disease is knee jeroga. It is due to imbalance created within your system not due to external factors. Agantukrog can be created by ah external factors like say an infection due to viruses or bacteria or due to an accident something can happen to the body. So, this is all due to external factors this is minimal in human life they will tell you, but this knee jeroga which means I create a certain amount of imbalance within myself through my wrong ways of thinking, through my wrong attitudes, through the abuse of the body mind complex and that creates a kind of dis ease within myself and I attribute it to all kinds of factors. So, this is what is greatly happening today medical science has come to this understanding. You know there is a term called psychosomatic disease, you must have heard of it. So, many of the so called diseases are psychosomatic disease, you must have heard of it. So, many of the so called diseases are psychosomatic in nature. Psych means mind, soma means the cells of the body, they are connected and many of our ailments are psychosomatic. Please try to understand this almost everything in the physical system starting from your ah blood flow, hemoglobin level, heart rate, then ah the mechanism of the liver, the stomach, the even the lining of the stomach, the flow of blood in the arteries, the lung mechanism, then the musculoskeletal system, the release of the endocrine system, release of hormones, enzymes, the functioning of all of this greatly depends upon the kind of thoughts you have. Today, if with chronic ailments if a person goes to a doctor, one of the conditions the doctor will put is please try to maintain a calm state of mind, a happy state of mind. Even the absorption of food, the function of the villi in the stomach and the endocrine system a lot of it depends upon habitually what you are used to, what states of mind you are used to. Are you in habitually happy states of mind or in depressed states of mind, does negativity is it a huge part of your ah everyday mind ah everyday thinking or is it a rare thing with you, all this matters a lot. You know there are ways of measuring happiness nowadays, happiness levels, there are different ways which we have covered ah some of it has been covered in the first course which I took here, you can go through those videos. There you can see clearly that there is a way of finding out your negative positive emotional level in a given time span say in the next one hour. How much of negativity do you suffer and how positive is your mind are you in a habitually cheerful state of mind or at least a glad state of mind or is it perpetually negative and you constantly need things to keep you busy otherwise you will go into negativity is it this kind of a state. So if we are used to this kind of continuous negativity which many youngsters I am very sorry to see this they are suffering from this. If this is your habitual state of mind there will be problems in the body. So, to overcome this there are definite techniques even Ayurveda will point out to this. Today's medical science has come to this any number of experiments have been conducted on this and they will tell you very plainly today even if you go to a physiotherapist you know he will tell you perform these exercises, but keep a very calm state of mind, keep a happy state of mind why it affects your body . So, we will try to understand this a little deeper. How is it that it affects your body? You know the nature of the body is it follows mind. The problem is we have learnt to think mind is because you cannot see it, it is somewhere in the brain or somewhere mind is all over your system. Every cell has memory that is why it follows a particular pattern, what you are calling heredity it is nothing, but in a sense memory. Because of this what has happened is your mind your body follows the nature of your mind, which means if your mind is by nature positive you have made it like that, do not think mind got created itself how we make it. I told you mind depends on two factors the whatever the content of your mind, one is what you taken through the senses and your memories what you have taken in the past to to a great extent these decide the content of your mind. So, your body has this tendency to follow the content of your mind. So, if your mind is perpetually in a negative mode, the body will pick up all that. And if mind is fresh and positive, glad, cheerful, by nature bubbling with joy, if you can maintain the mind like that it will show in the body. There is there is a famous incident of a doctor who led a wonderful life a very beautiful life in which he made a huge contribution to destitute children. He had a very good practice, he helped a whole lot of people during his about 50 more than 50 years of practice and after that he dedicated his time to lifting destitute children out of poverty about a 1000 children he saved from rank poverty levels. And then ah when he grew old when he was he would always say if anybody asked him how are you keeping doctor he would say I am very well thank you how are you he was always very well. So, even when he reached the age of 80 if anybody asked him how are you he would say oh I am excellent I am doing very well because really he had such a beautiful mind he always stayed very happy and after a few months after he turned 80 he passed away and when he passed on everybody was everybody who knew him they were they felt very sorry about this such a great life and then when the postmortem report came they saw that you know not a single organ in his body was actually functioning to perfection, although he always felt very well. Because of the nature of his mind which was always positive, always giving, always sharing, you know the body never felt any pain. In fact, cancer had spread to some areas of his body, but he never knew it. The state of his mind because of he had made it you see how do you change the state of your mind if you develop right positive attitudes, is not it? Caring, sharing, kindness if this becomes part of your system your mind will naturally remain happy. So, that is picked up by the body and if only thoughts of violence and anger and revenge all this is taking place in the mind, jealousy, then this will affect even the body. So, this is what is happening. It was found that his body was not in perfect order, but his mind never felt it. Because it was so habituated to cheer and goodwill and happiness, his body got along with his mind very well. So, this is a possibility the the mind the body will tend to follow the nature of the mind and you know when you are a in a very depressed or sickly state of mind you will always keep feeling pains and hurts and aches even if they are not there. Have you seen people like this constantly worrying, constantly complaining, grumbling, blaming others because their mind is not in their hands at all. They will constantly be telling you something which has not worked with them. The whole point is you must learn to refresh the mind, renew the energies of the mind from time to time and enforce positivity not enforce what I mean to say is make it your default state naturally always you can do this easily through yoga. You can replace thoughts, you can replace your habits, you can replace the worries, anxiety modes of your mind. If you make these things your default state, you know, then the mind radiates sort of a kind of happiness, a kind of joy, a kind of ease and well-being. So this makes you successful wherever you are, not just health wise, it will draw very good minds to you. You will enjoy your experience of life like anything in fact this is this should be the natural state for every young mind isn't it when all your energies are just now in your hands this should be the natural perpetual state of mind so now how do we manufacture this first of all correct your relationship with the body this is very important please see this this is an instrument given to you to function in this world how will you treat an instrument you will treat it with care your scriptures tell you this is the temple of God if the Atman is of the very nature of consciousness bliss the supreme then this is the external manifestation of that this is the temple for the soul how will you keep a temple how do you maintain temples you keep them clean and pure so this is part and parcel of good living never never think that well the body is just something you are not contained within it you are using it as an instrument. So, it is something you must care for it is something you must keep clean and fresh always this should be the attitude towards the body. Your relationship with the body will be will is going to affect how your mind is going to behave. You know it is not just that the mind affects the body, even the body to a certain extent affects the mind. If you keep it clean and pure you know your your mind will be functioning in a particular very positive way. So, they influence each other. This is you will find this in a huge way in William James psychological theory that your postures, your attitudes, the way you handle your body all this is going to create the moods of your mind. That is why in India you know art forms were always committed to the highest ideals. Have you seen this? Traditional art forms were always based on the highest ideals. Have you seen this? Traditional art forms were always based on very high ideals. So, that whatever you do by way of art whether it is music, whether it is dance, everything is geared towards lifting your energies and emotions to a higher ideal. It is geared towards something which elevates human life. I can tell you a simple story here, it this is also a real story hm. There was this American girl who right from the age of 16 she developed very strong depression and such a level of depression some people can suffer that they are on antidepressants every day and nothing is making her coming out of that phase. So, she finally, left college and she she was in high school at that time then she entered college could not do it. So, she left it and then she had fortunately she had some friends who invited her to India and she came to India and here for the first time she saw this Bharatnatyam performance somewhere and she liked it very much and she came home and she told her friends that what kind of a dance form is I would like to learn it. And they introduced her to the teacher and all that and she started taking lessons. Over a period of 3 months, she completely overcame her depression. She stopped taking antidepressants she was seen to give more and more time in pursuits like this listening to good music, dance and in a cheerful state of mind all the time then she herself was very surprised because for years she had been going through these phases of depression so she went and asked her teacher how come just learning Bharatanatyam has brought me out of this depression and you know what the teacher said she said what are you doing in Bharatanatyam you are depicting the modes of gods the bhavas of Krishna or Shiva or Durga the modes of gods that has an impact on your mind whatever you depict however you handle your body that has an impact on your mind because you are depicting such elevating emotions elevating bhav in our culture always it was refining the bhav not polishing just the behavior and their bhav kaisa hai that was paramount, so because you are working at that level it is naturally your whole system is becoming very positive and so you're getting out of depression, so how you handle your body that will affect your mind further on, this is one system please see it's a composite body-mind unit through which you are functioning. So, learn to handle it with care, this is primary knowledge. Then let me tell you one more thing, this is regarding in behavioral sciences you know this is coming in today. There is a huge branch of psychology which is called behavioral psychology, what determines the behavior of a person. If you finally, go to the core standpoint it comes to yoga vedant, what determines the behavior of a person, his external actions, his motivations, his ah work towards others, his attitudes towards others, it is finally, the content of his mind, what attitude he has and that content of the mind is determined by what? It is determined by his orientation towards life and reality. So, if there is this kind of a spiritual outlook, naturally your mind will be functioning in a particular way, you will not go into negative phases of life depression and anxiety stress all this will not come into a mind which is perpetually positive. So, how to manufacture this kind of a mind is something we are deeply going to go into in today's class because self management includes managing your thoughts, emotions, your will, your levels of awareness and finally, your life that is the manifestation of all this through the body-mind mechanism. So, this is the essential part of you, you know your thought and emotion is essentially your mind and of course, your will. So, the difference between compulsive person and conscious person is this that compulsive means you are not in charge of your thoughts and emotions, you are some other external factor is deciding how you will think and how you will feel. So, you are at the mercy of your gadgets, other people's emotions, other people's feelings for you, you are at the mercy of the external. But conscious behavior means you are not at the mercy of anything. I am conscious enough to know what is happening in my mind and hence I replace negativity with positivity consciously. You get that capacity. So, the whole difference between compulsive and conscious behavior that is actually the measure of intelligence. You know if you are more conscious you will become more intelligent and if you are compulsive even if you were intelligent at one time you can degrade that intelligence. Are you seeing this the connections? Um easily genuine intelligence is becoming more and more conscious of your inner faculties taking the whole thing your body mind complex in your hands. So, that you lead the life you want to lead, you are not a slave to anything external, you generate your happiness and peace by yourself. This is the essential independence and glory of human life. So, today even intelligence is being studied with respect to all this. You know intelligence is a multidimensional something IQ intelligence. Today I am going to give you all the types of intelligence available that we have come to so far. Let me show you a slide on this. Intelligence is multidimensional and look at the multiple intelligences available today to you. In our study of intelligence we have come to this. You see there is logical, intelligence, visual, musical, intrapersonal, kinesthetic, then what is that interpersonal, naturalistic and linguistic. All these are the different dimensions of intelligence. Aap ye mat samjhe sirf logical intelligence is there, there is no musical or kinesthetic intelligence that means, you are the intelligence is not fully developed yet hm all this is included under intelligence today . So, essentially development of all of this constitutes intelligence and this includes your not just your logical analytical ability, but your emotional abilities, it includes your power of willing, your attitudes, your motivations, it includes your talents, it includes everything. So, development of everything is the real development of intelligence. Your logical analytical ability upon which we are laying the greatest amount of stress in today's educational system that is an a very essential part no doubt, but that is only one dimension of intelligence. So, you see in the hierarchy of human intelligences today you have at the bottom of the pyramid is PQ physical quotient it is called which is actually your body awareness and it is skillful use hm the proper spatial orientation understanding your relationship with the body. Then IQ levels that is the next level of higher intelligence, you see there you have math verbal intelligences um all of this is included in IQ. Essentially your rational, logical, analytical ability is IQ. Then over that is EQ, it is a higher form of intelligence, it includes what managing ourselves and our relationships basically managing your emotions, making them positive so that they work for you, they do not work against you. You know your intelligence can turn against you if your emotions cannot be managed properly, is not it, this is not this true, if my intelligence cannot be managed properly. Isn't it? This is not this true? If my intelligence cannot be managed properly, my emotion cannot be managed properly, my intelligence will turn against me. And then at the top of that pyramid you see this today's science is telling you this is SQ which is spiritual quotient acting with inner wisdom guided by compassion . So, if this is there every other quotient is going to work magic for you, otherwise your PQ physical quotient IQ intelligence quotient EQ emotional quotient SQ. If SQ is there all of this will work properly, if SQ is not there you never know your intelligence quotient even it can be lopsided development you know intelligence quotient alone is there, the other quotients are lacking. There is another quotient called VQ which is not here in this diagram, VQ is volitional quotient which means your power of willing. How strongly you can will and stick to your will, not that the will is changing direction always, you stick to what you have willed and achieve it this is VQ. And there is another quotient recently discovered called AQ which is adversity quotient, which means in the face of adversity can you stand up and achieve your goals, otherwise a little bit of adversity in your life and you just break apart. This can also happen, is not it? A really intelligent person is one who turns adversity also into opportunity. Adversity can come into life, but that does not mean you break down. So, that is also a dimension of intelligence. All of this together give you success in life. At that peak is always a skew. Please understand this because if you are spiritually not mature which means you have not learned to stand up for who you truly are and handle your body mind as an instrument in your hands, none of the other quotients will work optimally. This is essential part of today's understanding of intelligence levels. So, handling thought and emotion hm this should be our priority. See in your everyday education this may not come that is why courses like this are introduced for you and this is happening in many universities today because everybody understands the importance of this. Without handling this system how can I handle the world? Without handling my thought and emotion properly can I handle your thought and emotion? Responsibility itself means I told you responsibility, if your responses and reactions are totally out of place you cannot handle anything in this world. So, first I get charge over myself, I take charge over myself this is the first thing to do. So, let us go step by step handling thought, handling my thought mechanism. What does it mean? What does a single thought, what is its structure, what does it feel like? Can you tell me any of you? One single thought, what does it constitute? See in every thought, when you think one complete thought, there is an idea portion, right, it is an idea basically to which you can attach an emotion and the whole thing has been enlivened by your vital energy. Now, if the idea is prime main thing about the thought then it is called a rational thought. If the emotion is the main thing it is called a rational thought. If the emotion is the main thing, it is called an emotional thought, an emotion basically. So, it is only a difference in degree. Your every thought will have an idea and an emotion and vital energy invested into it. So, this is a single thought like this constantly thoughts are taking place in your mind and with every thought your mind is getting modified that is why a restlessness we feel in the mind is due to that. Whatever you think your mind is tinged by that. So, if you learn to think in an orderly way with considerable positivity in your idea and emotion, your mind is constantly getting tinged by something very positive. So, it will remain orderly, it will be very balanced. Otherwise, it can go into very erratic states of mind, is not it? If constant negativity is there in the idea and in the emotion, your thought is very unstable. So, mind also becomes unstable . So, please understand this your thought mechanism how it functions you must learn to pay attention to it. A little bit of meditation every day will help you manipulate your thinking, it will help you bring your thinking in order. Otherwise you you go off track many times this happens see suppose your teacher told you something which you did not like or your friend told you something which you did not like if you spent 50 percent of your day worrying about that or thinking harshly about that you know how much of energy you waste and this is happening that is why all these over anxious depressive phases of your life. You have given things the importance they do not deserve, the whatever the rebuke or whatever it was for a particular purpose you must solve that and go ahead, you must drop the matter there, but no the worry continues. So, unnecessarily investing energy in what is not required is one of the causes for your negativity. Another thing is allowing only negativity to enter into you through different external influences which means if you see today's youngsters, they do a half an hour of study or one hour of study, then they need 15 minutes of entertainment. After that somehow with great effort again bring your mind back to study, again after sometime half an hour of entertainment. Aisa kyu hona chahiye? If this is your normal default state, you better change it because if you are allowing all sorts of things to come into your study period you are not applying your whole mind at all that is the meaning. So, sustained attention and focus you can only maintain if your thoughts are aligned, if your thought world is ordered, you see the importance of taking conscious care of your thought mechanism. That is why limit your exposures when you are if you want to be in a concentrated state of mind, my exposures will be only positive and limited to specific hours maybe, but not all the time, not like this, any time, any time is entertainment time, no such thing. Consciously if you follow these few things, when I say limiting your exposures, please understand this, what you take in through the senses becomes the content of your mind. If constantly violent things you are taking in, harsh things, gross things, your mind will start functioning like that. Unawares, you do not want it to happen, but it is happening. This is what is called compulsive thinking. You are compelled to think in a particular way, tomorrow it will become action. What you think today will become action tomorrow. Many people you know who become very negative negative they do not want to be like that, but they are they have entered that compulsive habit has entered. So, they are like that. It is not a question of knowledge I do not know. Everyone knows what is the right thing, what is the good thing to do, but we are not able to do it that is our problem. You know in Mahabharat there is this very beautiful incident which concerns Duryodhana. When he is standing in the just before the war started Bhishma, Bhishma Pitamah is telling Duryodhana you do not know basic dharma that is why due to you this war is taking place. You do not have the basic knowledge of dharmaharma you don't know how to behave with elders you don't know how to behave with anybody that is why today all this crisis and you know what Duryodhana's reply was don't tell me I don't know I know everything I can't do it jaanami dharmam na chame pravrttim jaanami adharmam nachame nivritim, this is my problem, I know what is dharma, I can't do it, I am compelled to do the wrong thing, I have entered this compulsive modes of mind, compulsive habits and janaami adharmam nachame nivritim, I know what is adharma but I can'tist from it because my habits have become like that. Once we will discuss habits, how to change habits, it is very important habits of mind, habits of emotion, thought and emotion and habits of willing, these three. Habitual patterns should be very correct and strongly positively aligned otherwise constant negativity and struggling with unnecessary things your energies will go in that. So, this is regarding the thought mechanism if you force forcefully bring only compulsive habits into your life by careless ways of living heedless ways of living today after getting this knowledge knowledge at this, at least you this group should not be like that. You know the nature of leaders is they are independent, they are not compulsive in by habit. They are conscious decision makers, they take conscious charge over their life, so they become leaders. So, this capacity should naturally develop with this knowledge, is not it? This is the expectation from this course that you become really mature adults. Handling your thought first thing, second thing is most important handling your emotion because emotion is such a huge part of your personality. You do not know, but emotion for most people emotion dominates the thought process. Most of your personality you do not know, but emotion for most people emotion dominates the thought process most of your thinking is emotional. So, if you have no charge over it, it will carry you away blow you away somewhere unless you take a little charge over your system. What is emotion basically? See today know they have studied emotion in a huge way you have certain elementary knowledge in Patanjali Yoga Sutras also in our scriptures like they talk of Kleshas Kleshta Vritti or Kleshta Vritti all this how it leads to Vipariyai wrong knowledge wrong emotions will lead to wrong knowledge all this they talk about but today we have substantial amount of knowledge on emotions and emotional intelligence. We should be able to utilize that see what is emotional intelligence basically look at that diagram there it includes all of this self awareness, self regulation, motivation, empathy and social skills. This together we are calling emotional intelligence. If all of this is there you know or the level of EQ will be very high emotional intelligence. Basically emotional intelligence deals with how to make your emotions positive which means through self awareness, through self regulation you develop high level motivation, empathy and social skills, all together they have put it under emotional intelligence, hm right. Now we will go deeper into this. In order to develop this, you must understand first of all what is an emotion. Emotion is a high energy thought with feeling. Emotions are thoughts charged with feelings. So, they are high energy thoughts. Is not this true? Anything which has emotion in it becomes etched in your memory. Please see this. So they are such powerful thoughts. So you must know all the more how to handle them. Because they are charged they create waves of vrittis. One single emotion in your mind will create it's not just one vritti it will create a wave of commotion in your mind positive or it can even be positive I should not call it commotion that's why it can create waves of vrittis in your mind so they are a formidable force actually emotions if they are positive they will produce quality vrittis isn't it if you are used to only positive emotions if they are negative then they produce not just wrong knowledge they will produce a wrong kind of bhav in you if they are of the negative nature and they deflect which is called as KUBHAV, not good feeling, you won't feel good yourself if they are of the negative nature and they deflect knowledge see suppose there is anger in your mind even what the other person is saying in front of you, you will not hear it you will have a biased view, a prejudice will rule your mind if your mind is tinged with the emotion of anger or hatred or jealousy is not it, you miss out the real knowledge about the thing, it is contextual, but whatever it is. So, please understand this that your emotion to certain extent generates your knowledge. So, take care take charge of your emotion that is why in today'scontext you know they say emotional intelligence is far more than IQ what your IQ will give you. If there is EQ higher level of EQ you will be successful anywhere not necessarily just with IQ. So, this is an essential part of your education, how do I make my emotions positive and elevate them. Like for example, you see here I have given the example of road rage. Suppose you are driving and somebody overtakes you on the wrong side or maybe traffic signal has come and too long you have had to wait and somebody goes through that traffic signal and you cannot bear it because you are waiting. So, all this leads to what is called road rage. This is a common thing for youngsters because you are you know speed is life for you. You want to go fast, but there is an impediment now. So, what will you add to this? This is the situation, but you will add your anger, your ego, your pride, loathe maybe for the person who sped away and the the negative emotion in your mind becomes huge. It overtakes your mental thought process and maybe you curse that person or say bad things about him, all this have you spoil your mood and the mood of people around you also . So, contribution came from where your emotion right whatever the external circumstances the emotion your mind generates is going to rule over you and if you do not have these negative emotions a habitually calm state of mind which has positivity you will let go of the incident because after all you cannot do anything about it you cannot change it just now and you would not allow it to affect you. This way you can work more positively productively may be tomorrow when you meet your friend you you can tell him in a very balanced state of mind that that was not the right thing to do and he will listen to you, but if you have anger and loathe in your speech do you think he will listen to you? To yehi baat hai if I cannot my responsibility is my responsibility if I cannot take responsibility of my emotions you cannot make any change in this world you won't know how to deliver the thing even the right thing so a primary hey now how to do this is what we will learn here see how to handle negative emotions what is the source of your negativity first of all let us understand the source of our negative emotions negative emotions come from toxic thoughts. This is something very important this your culture always told you. There is a group of 6 groups of thoughts whose presence leads to negative negative emotions in the mind. Kaam, krodh, madal, lobh, moh, maat, sir, aapne suna hoga at least school mein doho mein Tulsi das, Kabir das ji ke doho mein aapne suna hoga. There are yes 6 groups of thoughts which lead to negative emotions in the mind all of this you see lust, anger, pride, greed, infatuation, jealousy all of these are responsible for the negative emotions of your mind. They come from the toxicity of these thoughts. So, the methods of self-control it will start with changing your habits of thinking. Now they can only be changed by replacement techniques. You know a habit, how do you change a habit? Through replacing it with a better habit. If you attack the habit as it is, it may not change. There will be opposition from your mind only. You know our mind is not one whole thing. Your own mind can work against the higher mind which is telling you this is not right to do, but this mind is saying let us do it. So, habits if you can replace them, you make better habits in your life. You are not able to get up at a particular time you can give yourself habit cues which means triggers which will help you form better habits and then you can that that is how you make the better habits. Like for example, I know IITians are all nocturnals, you stay up late in night ah. You know actually I heard that you sleep at 3 o'clock or 4 o'clock hm because work labs are open at midnight. So, ok anyway you are doing all that, but then you are expected to get up at least at 8 o'clock in the morning hm once you go to sleep 8 or maybe ah holidays 9 whatever now many of you skip breakfast somehow you race to your classes and maybe when you find time you have your breakfast Toda sa agar ye level regulate na karo na the meditation that we are speaking of it will become very difficult Toda sa isko regulate karna hai which means as far as possible fixed hours for your breakfast you must have breakfast fixed hours for your lunch and then throughout the day your study hours I am not telling you do not sit up late at night you cannot but do it at this stage of your life you you have to do it but as far as possible regulate your sleeping eating habits as much as you can. So, that you know once it becomes a habit your life will be moving like that day after day and you can only change habits by replacing them with better habits. The habit was to skip lunch deliberately I will not skip lunch deliberately I will give myself habit cues at at a certain period of time I will go and do that thing deliberately. So, this conscious effort on your part is required to change to make the changes required hm When the mind goes out during concentration, I will keep the habit cues close to me, which means what, may be with your laptop you are sitting, you can have a cup of coffee, you can have triggers which help you study, but not straight away jumping into the media, jumping into the what your YouTube or whatever and going away from your subject. If you do that you lose your the energy of your concentration focus. So, you you replace the habit with a better habit hm by replacement techniques you can change habits. The second thing is bringing the bringing in opposite emotion during action. It is called Pratipaksha Bhavanam in Yoga Sutras, which means there is a tendency to get very angry at a particular moment. Deliberately I will smile, I will subdue my emotions, I will speak something good, I will do some positive action, maybe I helped somebody, but I will not give in to that anger at that moment. Yeh sambhav hai, you feel like blurting out something at somebody because that person irritated you deliberately you will do an act of service to subdue your emotion bringing in the opposite emotion through action is important in order to not create a terrible situation for yourself also and for the other person. You can only change people if you are in a very balanced state of mind, please see this. Not by shouting and screaming and torturing other people and talking behind them, these are not the ways to change. If you want to change another person's attitude, behavior, whatever it is, you can do it only if you are in a very balanced state of mind, then only you can affect the other person. So, bringing in the opposite emotion is important for you and that is why they in Patanjali Yogasutras you have all this maitri karuna mudita upeksha which means no matter what the reaction is from the other side you will only have a positive state of mind. Even if you do not go deeply into this just now this much you should understand deliberate positivity in the mind has to be practiced. In road rage for example, you smile, you say sorry if you have said something negative use all this. So, that the mind remains in a balanced state, the use of sorry and thank you is quite common in the western world. It is for this you stay in a state of gratitude and positivity all the time, not with negative emotions raging in your mind. If you allow that to happen, negativity to reign in your mind, people will keep away from you. Abhi aapko pata nahi chal raha hai, tomorrow in the work place you will understand the importance of all this. Then you must learn to see the whole picture, this is a way of changing the emotion, which means what? Temporarily if you create a problematic situation for yourself meaninglessly for small small things you are the loser, you see the whole picture what will this lead to this sense we must have you see a well developed analytical mind will have this sense that what will this lead to I use a word what will that word what is the reaction which will be produced in that person due to that word I cannot just blurt out anything your speech your action your thinking everything it should pass through the conscious filter of your will not just it came out I could not do anything. So, that is why we are saying that certain a level of control at this level is required if you want to be successful otherwise you will be mediocre. Hai na? Aap hi soch ke dekho. Yeh koi theory nahi hai. This is the practical application of Yoga Vedanta in your life. You, you can show you are in charge by the level of control you exercise at all in all these planes. Then good works must be made a habit, you know this is something again lacking from our education system. If you believe in something you must be able to do it, if you are constantly caring sharing if you make this part of your life a habit with you, you create good impressions in your mind, mind will be habitually happy by nature. So, good works creates good impressions, thoughts of compassion, love and service, substitute thoughts of anger, hatred and jealousy. I told you substitution, replacement is the way to change habits and all these thoughts actually have therapeutic effect on your body, is not it. So, you gain by all this and the final way which is usually given to handle your emotions is meditation. Stop the thought process at least for a few fractions of a second every day it will give you charge over the thought mechanism. So, these are all the ways usually to handle this you know you refer to any book on self development self management and all that they will tell you the importance of fixing the outside fix this person fix that, keep away from such people that is secondary, primarily fix this, primarily you must be in a such a state of balance and orderliness that you know how to behave in every particular situation. So, this is the essential part of leadership, you know the last course which I gave here was on leadership. Effective leadership is only possible if you are in charge of your physical and mental mechanism. So, this is the essential part of leadership training how to manage negative emotions because you know there is something a part of EQ is called ambiguity tolerance. Ambiguity ka matlab hai? Have you heard of the word ambiguity? Two types of the same person is saying two types of things, your ability to manage such situations. Understanding contextually why he is saying two different types of things, in this context this holds in that this ability if you have you will be able to manage all such ambiguities in every situation. If you do not have this ability it will lead to clash, is not it? So, easily I may carry you this system has to be first of all. . Yes, improved, changed. Now we go to the next aspect of okay I have not finished with emotion just one minute there are certain fundamental things which you should know about emotional intelligence. If emotional intelligence is developed you naturally get what is called self confidence and self efficacy. Yes Shabda apne suna hai self efficacy was a very huge concept in the 1970s and 80s Efficacy means ability to do something If you are efficacious, it means you are capable Self-efficacy means I know I am capable This confidence, this positive idea So, this only comes if your emotions and thoughts are manageable by you, is not it? You become self efficacious. The I can do it stand comes when you find yourself reliable through all of this understanding and application. When you find yourself reliable, you become self efficacious. So, this is also part of emotional intelligence, do not take emotional intelligence lightly it is going to play a huge part in your life in every life it plays a huge part and it contributes hugely to your success. So, one last point about emotional intelligence is there is an equation for you to understand, what causes the maximum amount of suffering in our mind? Is it pain? It is usually the resistance of your mind. Any situation there may be certain level of pain, as I told you somebody said a wrong word towards you, but the resistance of your mind the the additional amount of information which your mind added in the form of hatred, anger all this created an explosive situation. So, pain may be even physiological, but suffering is psychological because of the addition of your resistance a huge amount you can suffer. Somebody call you a fool, it is just a outpouring of somebody's bad mood, but you made it into a big thing and for a whole year you did not talk with that person. This can happen is not it? It is because suffering is equal to pain times your resistance, we give this equation S is equal to P into R, where S is suffering, P is pain, R is resistance. Now, see if your resistance is 0, suffering will be 0 even if pain is there, which means if your mind does not make any contribution, even if you are suffering some marginal pain, it's okay, you can handle it, it will not lead to suffering. But if resistance is huge, then suffering is always huge, no matter how small the pain is. So, a large part of your suffering is self-related, mind related, the basic training for the human being is how to become sattvic, if you have sattva in your body and mind what will happen you are able to control yourself at every level so these unnecessary reactions will not come at all just the required responses will come so you don't create suffering for yourself agar rajas and tamas is overactive in you then only all these problems come the basic training always has been that is why for this how to create a basically sattvic human being. So, this is regarding emotion. Now let us go to will. You must know certain basic things about will. When I will something and it fails, I must know why it has failed. What is lacking in me that my willpower did not work? How do you define will? See just look at this, this definition only Yog Vedanta will give you. Will is actually a compound between the self and the intellect, it is a compound which means it is again changeable that is why your will keeps changing directions, but you must learn to fix it for a long span of time, a long period of time so that it works. This is you can do it the more conscious you become from within the more you can fix your will. I told you if awareness content is minimal in the mind, you can neither handle your thought emotion nor will. It naturally becomes compulsive, it is decided by the external. If awareness content is great in your mind the will will function as it should the thought emotional mechanism will be in your hands that is why the essential thing is to become conscious this is real intelligence more and more conscious because you see the roots of your will are very close to the atman will is actually the dynamic aspect of the self so if you want to develop will power culture awareness the more ever you become from within the more your will will function for you naturally you become a person whose will works not just for yourself even in the outer world what you will will happen. Ye ek sambhavna hai. The more you awaken the inside the within the more you awaken completely to your own true being the more willpower develops. So, here let me tell you this ah point blank that the extent to which you become conscious to that extent your memory which means your retention capacity, your concentration which means your focus, your creativity, your analytical ability will get honed, sharpened immensely. As a result of this you will be successful everywhere and to the extent awareness has been blotted out through all kinds of erratic thought activity, negativities in the mind, over cluttered mind, no touch of yoga to that extent the mind all of these faculties contract because there's nobody in charge of them so that is why work on the essence the essential aspect is always you know it was stressed in especially in our spiritual culture that the self has to be awakened first aapka jo tattva hai, ye jo aatma tattva hum kehte hai, that has to be brought to the forefront and the rest of your personality gets imbued by that, that light and it will function magically for you. So this will get you all possible success in life, you know wherever they have spoken of spiritual intelligence, spiritual quotient all over the world today enormous studies are taking place. I can give you a number of experiments, but we do not have time here for all of that where they have found this to be actually true. The culturing of awareness in the mind takes care of the rest of everything about you because spiritual intelligence entirely depends upon this and the the qualities which you develop with spiritual ah quotient, spiritual intelligence which are you see here are those qualities purpose, self discipline, morality, courage, love, giving, excellence and detachment all these come as part and parcel of spiritual intelligence this will become part and parcel of your personality if once you arouse yourself to complete awareness you become more and more conscious from within. So all this follows naturally that is why the emphasis in our scriptures, especially in the Upanishads to awaken the self within you. This is not an option, this is not a matter of choice. It is compulsory to human life that you first awaken yourself to bring all this glory into your life, into your mind. Let me give you one simple technique here to do this because naturally, how do we do this? How do we become more and more conscious? So here, I would like to give you a technique today to help you understand what self-awareness means and what it will do to you. This technique I have drawn from Taithiri Upanishad. It is called Bhrigu Valli, commonly. It is actually a, it is a Vidya. Vidya means a kind of a meditation technique which takes you to the knowledge of the self which awakens you to full consciousness what we are discussing just now. So, this technique takes you there that is why it is a it is actually called Bhargavi Varuni Vidya, it is a Vidya. So let us discuss this briefly here to make you more and more conscious and aware within what is required and what it will lead to. See it starts like this, this portion starts like this, there is this young sage called Bhrigu, it is a story, so you will enjoy it. This Bhrigu Rishi, he is a young man, his father is Varuna, he is also a Rishi and this young man goes to his father and says, I want to know this Brahman, what you are constantly talking about, the substratum behind this world of manifestation, the one unchanging reality which I am, which is the real I, I want to know this, how do I go towards this knowledge, how do I know who I am? Then Varun Rishi tells him, tapasa brahma vijjanyasasva, do some level of tapasya and you will know this who you are, employ self-enquiry and do tapasya. So this Bhrigu goes and spends some period in meditation and then one day he comes and tells his father, I think I know what you mean by self, who I am, I think it is, is it the body, annam brahmeti vajanat, because you see I can, I feel this sense of identity with the body then the father says tapasabrahma vijjanyasasva do some more tapasya now can you tell me why you are not the body we have discussed a considerable amount of vedanta so far why are you not just this body why do I keep saying this is an instrument in your hands, it is yours it is not you, why? Because it is an object of your perception, is not it? It is an object of change, it is an object through which you are functioning, you are perfectly conscious of it as an object, I am speaking, I am conscious that I am speaking. So, I am not my speech. I am that through which the speech is becoming possible. This is the standpoint. Please see this anything which is an object of your perception cannot be you. It is yours, but it is your speech is yours but it is not you, you are that which is using the medium of speech to express something, you are that which is using the medium of the body to function in this world, so you are not merely the body, so go and do some more tapasya and find out who you are the father says and Bhrigu goes and does some more tapasya then he comes and says father I think a little more I have understood pranam brahmeti vijanat this prana the vital energy in me is that brahman is that the real I and then the father says no my son go back to your meditation now why are you not the pranayika energy merely the vital energy because that also has movement that has changed that is also an object of your perception you can feel the pranayika energy within you your vitality that increases that can decrease also that changes so that cannot be you then he asked him to again go and meditate. After sometime, Bhrigu comes and says, Mano brahmeti vajanat, is the mind me? See, this is the condition of most people. They think that they are mind, nothing more than that. But the father again says, no. Why are you not your mind? Can you perceive your mind? Do you know what is happening in your mind? You can know, is not it, your thoughts. See what is memory but the recognition of your thoughts of the past. So you can know your mind. If you can know something as an object of perception, it cannot be you. Again your mind, sometimes it is in full bloom, sometimes it has become dim, it can block awareness, it changes. How much it has changed since your babyhood? So you cannot be the mind, you are that which is standing behind the mind, the watcher of the mind's processes, you are the witness of the mind. So go back to your meditation. After sometime, Prabhu comes and says says I think this time I have understood Vijnanam brahmeti vijanat he says which means the higher intellect the buddhi I am that buddhi ye bhi hum bolta hai na I am my intellect you see I am recognized for my intellect are you your intellect why why not? Now you are catching the spirit of the Upanishads because you are giving the right you are nodding correctly. Why are you not your buddhi merely? You can sharpen it, you can hone it, you can also unsharpen it, you can make it blunt, it is changing and you again perceive your intellect as an object. So you are not merely your intellect. Then again he goes back to his meditation. After sometime he comes and says, Anandam brahmeti vajanat. I think that Anandamai kosh, the causal body it is called, through which streams out the light of the Atman, that is me. And then the father says, you have come very close to the light of the Atman that is me and then the father says you have come very close to the source of your being now at this point if you ask yourself who is it who is feeling this Anand who is it who is feeling this streaming out of consciousness into the body-mind you will come to the core essence of your personality and this is how Varun, Bhrigu Rishi just through self-enquiry and meditation plunged into self-knowledge into the Atman and came to know that he is that consciousness which is enlivening this entire apparatus. He is functioning through it, but he is totally apart from it. He is of the nature of existence, consciousness, bliss. He is the very source of that mental awareness through which he is studying all this. He is nothing but an image of Brahman what he is worshipping he is nothing but that in the form of the Atman pure consciousness and that is actually illuminating all aspects of his personality and what comes out of this knowledge this also this Upanishad will tell you Anna van Anado Bhavati which means due to this understanding Bhrigu became developed a very healthy physical system. Annavanam Natho Bhavati actually means this that he developed great health because I am telling you if the light of awareness is made to stream unobstructed in the body it results in health. The science of Ayurveda will tell you this if you block pranic energy, vitality is nothing, but an aspect of your awareness, the physical aspect of your awareness. That is why if you commit pran, you develop a higher awareness . So, if you actually allow awareness to flows unobstructed in your system it results in health and if you allow it to flow unobstructed in your mind it results in mental awareness great mental awareness where you can actually see thoughts objectively. So, you can handle them hm annavan anna do bh bhavati, Mahan bhavati, he becomes great naturally. Prajaya, Pasubhi, Praja here is like minded, it does not essentially mean children, it means like minded great minds will come to you. Pasubhi, Pasu was a measure of wealth, great wealth will come to you. Brahmavarcha Sena, by your Brahm Varchas, by the Tej of your personality by the light in your personality and Mahan Kirtia, great fame will be yours due to this If the self is brought into full manifestation, you see Vivekananda says this in so many so many ways he has put this call upon the sleeping soul and see how it awakens, he says power will come, glory will come, goodness will come, purity will it awakens he says power will come glory will come goodness will come purity will come all that is excellent will come once the soul is aroused to self-conscious activity this is what they are trying to tell you in the Upanishads you awaken to the reality the body-mind complex will be taken care of. In fact, your health is guaranteed, even mental health is guaranteed if awareness comes to the forefront in your mind. So, this is the method given to you and what basically what this will bring into your life is utter clarity and confidence. You are clear about everything, any information coming in front of you, you are clear about everything any information coming in front of you you see your your present day study material coming in front of you your mind is so clear you soak in the information, high levels of concentration will develop. You due to this immense clarity remains and confidence due to born of that clarity, you know how confident men of realization are that is why they are the great movers of this world, world movers Vivekananda used to call them. Once somebody told the Buddha well what you say does not exist in the scriptures, then Buddha said well then you put it there, put them there in the scriptures. Then the person said, what you say actually contradicts the scriptures. Then he said, that means the scriptures need amendment. This is what is called confidence. Because it is an experience with you, if the inside is absolutely clear, if you have found your way to the source of your being everything is taken care of, it gives you from clarity comes power, you know the power of a personality is due to his clarity, the confidence is due to his clarity, so in all these things there is a way to hai, development from within. Self management essentially means this, you have learnt to manage yourself perfectly. So, everything falls in place. You know a person the outside world only trust a person who trust himself. If you are not sure of yourself, your own thoughts, your ideas, your convictions, do you think anybody will trust you? So, if you want the trust of people, the faith of people, if you want to be a real leader in the workplace, this level of confidence in yourself is required. You have found yourself 100 percent reliable. It comes from the spiritual knowledge. So, you are trustworthy first to yourself and hence to others. This is self-management essentially. We will stop today's session here because a lot of ideas have gone into today's session. Think over it.
 Om Asato Ma Sadgamaya Tamaso Ma Jyotirgamaya Mrityurma Amritam Gamaya Om Om shanti shanti shanti. Om lead us from the unreal to the real, lead us from darkness unto light, lead us from death to immortality. Om peace peace peace. Peace, peace, peace. Good morning and namaste to everybody. The few who are brave souls who are gathered here and our much larger virtual audience. The subject today is Vedanta through five parables. Often I have seen that all the teachings of Vedanta, it is the stories which people remember, the stories which people like. We know that Jesus taught through parables, Sri Ramakrishna taught through some very interesting parables. Great spiritual masters have often conveyed spiritual truths through interesting stories. And they know our psychology that we may not remember abstruse metaphysical truths, but everybody loves a Over the years I have heard wonderful stories illustrating the most profound teachings of Vedanta. And I have told these stories a number of times. In fact, what I am going to say today, five stories which I have collected which sort of express the essence of Vedanta, the whole spiritual journey and the deepest truths. I have told these stories time and again. And I remember once several years ago at Oxford University I was speaking with a professor of Chinese studies whom I know and I was just talking about the Vedanta talks. He was saying your talks are very popular. I said yes but that's a problem because in this day and age it's all online. So everybody has heard everything and it's very difficult to come up with something new every time. I have to keep repeating myself and that worries me and the professor said, no Swami, you don't have to come up with new things, people don't expect that from you. When famous rock stars and pop musicians they go and perform, people want their favourite songs to be played, the top hits, the golden oldies. So today we're going to hear some of the golden oldies. We have the five stories. Four I have heard from monks in the Himalayas, either directly from them or through books or in the talks. And so I have no real textual source for those four stories, the first four stories. It's just word of mouth. It's an oral tradition handed down from teachers to students. And the fifth one is well known, the last story will be from Swami Vivekananda which is published. So five stories and the most profound truths of Advaita Vedanta. The first one and there's a method, there's a method to my madness, why I am telling these stories. There is a particular sequence to it which we shall see. The first one deals with the methodology of Advaita Vedanta. What is going on here? This first story will show how Advaita teaches. In Advaita Vedanta the journey is from ignorance to knowledge, from not knowing to realizing to knowing. And how it is done, there is a particular methodology. The reason I am going to tell this particular story first is all the other stories which will follow they all have the same inner code you will be able to identify what's going on there. So the first story is the key to unlocking the other four stories in fact it's the key to the entire Vedanta philosophy. The story the story of an a donkey. So this is the washerman's donkey story. You have to imagine India, a washerman goes around, collects your dirty laundry and takes it. And he has a donkey on which he loads the laundry and then takes it to the river side and then cleans it, washes it thoroughly, spreads it out on the rocks to dry your clothes. And then finally he will fold them nicely and next day on the same donkey he will go around, do the rounds and deliver the clean clothes back to you. Even now they do it. All the modern laundries have come into vogue now. And people do have machines to do their washing at home. But there are still the traditional washermen are there. At least I have seen them in my own childhood. So this washerman, he goes from his house with the load of laundry to be cleaned to the river. He loads up the donkey and takes it along there. And when he reaches the river, to his dismay he finds, if he had forgotten to bring the rope with which to tie the donkey to the tree. Now this is a disaster for the poor man because if he has to go all the way back home, the day is wasted and he can't leave the donkey untied because if the donkey wanders off and that's it, it's like the washerman's SUV. He'll be ruined. He's a poor man. He's now wondering what to do. He can't leave the donkey untended. A gentleman of the village walks past and says, what's wrong? The washerman says, oh sir, I'm in so much trouble. This is the problem. I forgot to get the rope. How do I leave the donkey? I have to work hard near the river all day and I can't keep an eye on the donkey. The man said, there is no problem at all. Just pretend to tie the donkey. Go through the motions. That's all. Yes, just make sure the donkey sees you. So he does that. He pretends to take out the rope and tie it around the neck of the donkey and tie it to the tree. And the donkey is watching him. And then the washer man takes a load of clothes and tentatively goes to the river and looks back at the donkey. And the donkey is also looking back at him but not moving, staying there near the tree. And the washer man washes the clothes and once in a while looks back in the distance and sees the donkey is there just eating grass and just staying there near the tree as if it's tied. In the evening when he's all done the clothes are washed and dried and folded he brings them back and loads the donkey and says hut let's go back home. The donkey doesn't move. Obviously the donkey thinks it's tied. The washerman doesn't know what to do. I mean if it was really tied he could have untied it. But it's not really tied. What does he do? And he runs to the gentleman's house and says, sir what trouble you have put me in. Now the donkey won't move. The gentleman said that solution is very simple. Just pretend to untie it. Just pretend. Yes, just pretend to untie it. Go through the motions. Make sure the donkey sees you. And then the washerman comes back and goes through the charade of untying the non-existent rope. And the donkey watches. And then the washerman says, hot, let's go! And the donkey moves. So, this story illustrates the whole spiritual, the philosophy, the philosophical methodology in Advaita Vedanta. In technical terms, this is called Adhyaropa Pavad. Adhyaropa Pavad Abhyam Nishprapancham Prapanchatyam. This is the phrase. What does it mean? By the method of superimposition and desuperimposition do the wise teach that which is transcendent, that which is beyond all names and forms and language and conventions, which cannot be expressed, which cannot be even thought about. How do you express the inexpressible, the absolute, being, consciousness, bliss, which is beyond words. Even when you use the words being, consciousness, bliss, what exactly is it that you are referring to? How do you teach that? This is the method. We will see what the method is, but the core of it is superimposition and desuperimposition. Somehow the donkey which is free all the time comes to think that it is tied. Similarly we the ever free consciousness, awareness, unlimited awareness, unlimited being, immortal, we come to feel that we are in samsara. We feel we are tied to these bodies, we are born with the birth of the body, we age with the aging of the body, we die with the death of the body. This seems to us to be concrete truth. It's far from the truth. We are tied in samsara, tied to people and bad relationships and financial problems and all sorts of unhappinesses in this world. Our own internal desires and frustrations and fears. We feel we are tied. It's concrete truth. How can you say it's not true? And yet Vedanta has this radical, devastating bombshell. It teaches us that you're not really bound. And yet we feel we are. Then what's the way out? The only way out is what was done with the donkey. It's to de-hypnotize, to show that you're not really bound. And that's all that Vedanta does. This feeling that we are bound, I am a body, I am a mind, this is called superimposition. Adhyaropah. And the whole technique of showing us that we are not bound, we never were. We are not and we will never be, it's impossible. That we are always the unlimited, we are never limited as bodies. This technique is called de-superimposition. Swami Vivekananda called it hypnotization and de-hypnotization. So this de-superimposition, in Sanskrit this is called apavadah, de-superimposition. That is the going to the motions to the so-called untying of the donkey. So this is the method. We will see. An assignment to all those who are hearing these stories is that when we go to the remaining four stories which will illustrate the central teachings of Vedanta, notice the superimposition and the desuperimposition. Always in all Vedantic teaching notice the superimposition, desuperimposition. All the stories which we will see now will have this superimposition, desuperimposition, adhyaropa, apavada, the hypnotization and dehypnotization pointing to the Vedantic truth. First is arguably one of the most popular stories. It has become very popular. Lots of people tell me, Swami tell us that story. Is this true or is that true? Yes such or no such? So this story I will never forget the first time I heard it. It was really quite a dramatic setting. I was in Gangotri in the Himalayas and this monk, after our afternoon prasad, after getting bhiksha food, we would go for a walk in the mountains surrounding Gangotri, 10,000 feet high in the Himalayas, surrounded by forests, the Ganges, Ganga rushing by, narrow fast stream, hundreds of feet below. And we'd walk the narrow mountain paths until it came close to sunset and then we would go back to our huts, caves, whatever. So one day while walking with these monks, one of those monks, he was a really good storyteller. Only later I discovered that he would lengthen the stories or shorten them according to the sunset. You know, like it would go on and on until the sunset. So, one of the stories which was this story of the Emperor Janaka. The mighty Emperor Janaka, he goes to sleep one day in his palace and at night he's suddenly awakened. Your Highness wake up, your Highness wake up. What's wrong? The enemy has attacked. The enemy is upon us. There's an invasion. We must go and defend our kingdom, our empire. And the Emperor says, he jumps out of bed and he says call out the army, call the generals, give me my armor, my bow and arrows, my sword and shield. And he goes out to fight the enemy in the dead of the night and there is a terrible battle and unfortunately poor Janaka is defeated. He is captured by the enemy soldiers, put in chains and dragged before the invader. The invading king says that, oh Janaka, you are of royal blood so I will not kill you but you are banished from your kingdom, your empire. It's now mine. I am the conqueror. You are to leave henceforth. And so Janaka, poor Janaka, what can he do? He is wounded and exhausted and devastated by his terrible loss. He walks and walks, begs for food somewhere, begs for water elsewhere and nobody is willing to help him. It was the Emperor yesterday and today nobody wants to help him. They are scared of the new tyrant, the invader and they say you go leave the kingdom as soon as possible and poor Janaka he walks to the border and he crosses over to the next kingdom. Which I always say, leads me to think that his empire couldn't have been all that big. If within a few hours he could cross the border. And then he goes there to the other side of the border and there he sees poor people. It's like a soup kitchen, poor people are being fed. So, in India they are called annakshetras, food places. So there's a long queue, line of people waiting for the rice and lentils preparation, khichdi we call it in India. And Janaka stands there, hopefully when it's his turn he comes there and the man who's serving says we are all out we just finished and Janaka can't take it anymore he says whatever is there at the bottom of the cauldron of the bottom of the barrel just give me that so whatever was there the last dregs those are scooped out and put in a bowl and given to this poor man who is obviously suffering and Janaka with trembling hands brings the bowl to his lips and a kite, circling, swoops down and knocks the bowl from his hands and it goes all spilt in the dust, the last of the food. And poor Janaka can't take it anymore. He collapses on the ground there and saying ha ha in Hindi. I heard the story in Hindi. Ha ha kar karte viye, the monk said. The ha ha in Hindi means exactly the opposite of what it means in English. So in Hindi or in Indian languages ha ha means alas, alas. Not the English ha ha. And he falls on the ground weeping and sits up on his bed. His heart pounding and all sweaty and he looks around in the dark royal bed chamber. He had obviously shouted and the guard, the sentry runs in and says, Your Highness, is anything wrong? Of course, at that moment, any one of us would have said, Oh, that was a dream, a nightmare. Thank God, everything is fine. But he is a philosopher. Janaka is a philosopher. So he says, Yeh such ya wo such? Was that true or is this true? The sentry is bewildered, he doesn't know what to make of that. He runs and calls the Queen and the Queen grumbling comes, it's late in the night, what's wrong with the old man now? And the Emperor says in a confused, in a pondering tone, was such, ya vo such. Was that true or is this true? The Queen is also confused and worried. She calls the doctor and the doctor takes his pulse and says, Sir is anything hurting? Are you uncomfortable? What's wrong? Is this true or was that true? And that's what he keeps on doing and next day in the morning, you know no Twitter in those days but the grape wine or the lotus wine and the story is all around in the city and the marketplace that the emperor has lost his marbles. He just sits there saying, was that true or is this true? And the sage Ashtavakra is visiting the city and he is friends with the emperor. They have discussions on Vedanta on and off. So he hears that his friend Emperor has lost his barbels, he has gone crazy. He keeps saying is this true or is that true. So he decides to pay his friend Emperor a visit. The sage goes to the court and the Emperor is sitting there on his throne surrounded by his Queen and ministers and generals and courtiers and everybody is bewildered. They don't know what to do. You can imagine the scene. They go up to the emperor, Please sign the bill to continue the government or something like that in the past, in the Congress or something like that. And the emperor says, Is this true or is that true? Is this true or was that true? So the work of the empire has come to a standstill and they don't know what to do. So Ashtavakra goes and says, so Emperor how are you today? The Emperor says was that true or is this true? And Ashtavakra being this omniscient sage of course knows what the Emperor is referring to. So he says, that defeat, that humiliation, that terrible loss and the pain and the hunger and the exhaustion when you were rolling on the ground and and crying ha ha alas alas is all of that here now right now? The Emperor as if coming out of a stupor he says, no, it's not here. And all of this, your might, your generals and your queen and your army and all of this glory, was all of this there at that time? Emperor says, no, none of it was there. So the emperor says, neither this is true nor that is true. Neither this is true nor that is true. The emperor is stunned. Is this a nihilistic philosophy? Nothing is true? The emperor says, so is nothing true? Everything is void, everything is empty, all is false. And the sage says, no Emperor, all of this, it is not true, it is an appearance and yet you are here, you experience it, do you not? Yes. And there, that was a dream. It's not true, that defeat, that exhaustion and all that humiliation, the frustration and the pain. No. But you did experience it, right? You saw it. You were there. You saw it. You were there and you saw that. Emperor says, yes. You saw that and you saw this. You are seeing this. Yes. Then Emperor, neither this is true nor that is true but you are the truth. Na yeh sach, na voh sach, tum hi sach. Now this is the story and this illustrates the core teaching of Vedanta. Brahma satyam jagat mithya jeeva brahma eva naapara. Brahman alone is true, is the reality. The world is an appearance and you, the individual sentient being, the one who considers himself or herself to be a samsari in trouble and sorrow, you are that absolute reality. How so? So this is a teaching straight from the Mandukya Upanishad, where we are asked to consider our experiences, our days are constituted of waking, dreaming and deep sleep. Our waking days. So I am the waker and I have experienced my waker's world, the people and the relationships and the jobs and the house and my own body and all the issues that I have, all the hopes that I have, all of that I experience. That is called the waker's world and I am the waker, this person in this body. But I fall asleep and in no time this entire waker's world is erased. Even my awareness of the body goes, the body is sleeping. My awareness now sees another world constituted by my mind. I know that after waking up, but it seems like a real world out there and I am there in that world. I'm moving around, doing things and enjoying and suffering. That's a dream. So I am the person in the dream, the dreamer and the dreamers world and then that also ceases. I go into deep sleep no external world, no body, no mind and no subject, no object all merged into one uniform blankness, deep sleep. That also comes and that also goes. All of these come and go to one awareness. Who is that? You! You are the one who sees the waking world. You are the one who sees the dream world and you are the one who sees the darkness of the deep sleep. You the awareness. As Ashtavakra said to Janak, to the emperor, tum hi sach, you are the truth. But which you? The one who is sitting on the throne, the one who is rolling in the dust, neither this body nor that body can be the ultimate truth. It came and went in your awareness. Neither this world of the empire and your glory, nor that world of the defeat and disaster, neither of them be true they came and went but what is true the awareness which saw both both are movies but the one who saw the movies is true to you the consciousness is presented the waker and the waker's world. In Sanskrit, in the Mandukya terms, Vishwa and Jagrat Prapancha. To you the consciousness represented the second, the dreamer and the dreamer's world. In Sanskrit terms, in the Upanishadic terms, the Taijasa and the Swapna Prapancha, dreamer and dreamer and dreamers world. To you the awareness is presented the absence of deep sleep, the blankness. The absence, not absence of sleep, the absence which is experienced in deep sleep. In Upanishadic terms Pragya and Sushupti Avastha. Sushupti Prapancha, now, the prapancha literally means the world in detail. So, in deep sleep there is no world in detail. It's just a merged blankness. These are the three which come and go. Three sets. Three sets of what? Subject-object. Right now, there is a subject, you, and there is an object, this objective universe. there's a subject you and there's an object this objective universe. In dream also there's a subject you the dreamer and there's an object the dream world. In deep sleep also there's a subject object but the subject object are merged into one so it's a blankness. These three pairs subject object pairs they are presented to the awareness, you yourself, counting from the perspective of waker, dreamer, deep sleeper, you the awareness can be can be called the fourth. Waker, one. Dreamer, two. Deep sleeper, three. You the awareness itself, pure consciousness, pure awareness. Pure awareness means not dressed up as the waker, not dressed up as the dreamer, not dressed up as a deep sleeper. But you in yourself, that one, that awareness can be called the fourth. In Sanskrit terms Vishwa, Trajasa, Pragya and the fourth is called Turiya. The word Turiya in Sanskrit simply means four. That's all. It just means the number four. This number four is actually not the fourth. It is the one which appears as the three. That consciousness, you yourself. It is the example which I love giving is of the gold and the ornaments. It is the same gold which appears as the necklace. If you melt it and make it into. It is the same gold which appears as the necklace. If you melt it and make it into a bracelet, the same gold, same exact same material will appear as a bracelet. Melt it and make it into a ring, the same gold will appear as a ring. Names are different. Necklace, bracelet, ring. They look different. Necklace, bracelet, ring. Their uses are different. Necklace you bracelet, ring. Their uses are different. Necklace you put here, the bracelet you put here, the ring you put on your finger. Name, form and use are different. Nama, rupa, vyavahara in Sanskrit. They are different. And yet you know it is exactly the same material. And that material gold alone is the reality. Not the name, not the form, not even the use. How can you say that name and form and use are not real? They are not real in a very technical sense. The technical sense is without the gold they don't stand. What does it mean? Without the gold what will be left of the necklace? Nothing, literally nothing. The form will disappear. Take away the gold, the form will disappear. With no form at all, can you use it? Can you put something around your neck? No. It will be like that emperor's new clothes story. The emperor has no clothes. Then what does the name necklace refer to? Without the form, without the ornament called necklace, what does the word necklace refer to? Nothing. It becomes a word without a referent. This is called falsity. All the time it is the same reality. Now notice the reality gold is not affected by the names and forms. When it is a necklace it is the same gold. When it is a bracelet same gold. When it is a ring same gold. Nothing has happened to it. To gold, qua gold. As gold as gold, nothing has happened to it. It's perfectly alright. This consciousness alone appears as the gross universe, the physical universe, as this physical body through awareness, through mind and sense organs, experiencing a physical world. Same awareness, without any change at all now projects itself just as a mental universe called dream through the mind dressed up as the dream person, the Taijas. This same awareness now shuts down all projections and is there left with the blankness of all projections, which is deep sleep. You are that awareness. It is not affected by the goings on in the physical world, the so-called problems or the nightmares or the problems of the dream world or the blankness of the deep sleep. They come and go. They are mere entertainment to you, the limitless awareness. The Turiya, the seventh mantra of the Mandukya, magnificent mantra which tells us the details of this. But this is the story. What have we learned? That this Turiya alone is real. Real in the sense, the rest are like movies. Waking, dreaming, deep sleep like like waking and dreaming are like two movies. Deep sleep is like switching off the movie. Turiya is constant. Then, all of these movies and whatever is going on is within the Turiya. Within in the sense that it's not apart from the Turiya. It's not like actually a movie hall, where you are sitting there and there is actually a movie separate from you playing. Movie is not inside you, movie is outside you and you are watching the movie. That's the Sankhya philosophy. The consciousness watching the play of Prakriti. But here in Advaita, notice just as in a dream the whole thing is in your mind, similarly the whole waking, dreaming and deep sleep are in Turiya, are an appearance in Turiya. They are not separate realities. It is non-dual. A movie is actually not non-dual. Actual movie if you go to a cinema hall and watch, it's not non-dual because you are the audience and there is the movie separately. Though it's a movie, it's not real, but still a separate thing apart from you. Here it's not like that. It's all within Turiya. It's all an appearance in Turiya, not different from Turiya. This is what is in Vedanta called Brahma Satyam Jagat Mithya. Brahman alone is real, the world is an appearance. And who are you? You are not really the waker. You are not really the dreamer. You are not really the deep sleeper. You are Turiya. This is the meaning of the phrase, Jeeva Brahmaiva Naapar. The Jeeva is none other than Brahman. You are the Absolute. And now you can happily play being the waker, the dreamer and the deep sleeper, knowing all the time that the actor can play all kinds of roles on Broadway. None of the roles really touch or affect the actor can play at all kinds of roles on Broadway. None of the roles really touch or affect the actor. The actor can play a beggar without his financial situation being ruined. And equally the actor can play at being a billionaire without actually becoming a billionaire. So none of the things that the actor plays in the Broadway theatre actually affects the actor. Neither financially nor physically. Health can play as dying person, can play an athlete without becoming either. So, you are that unaffected awareness. The projection takes three forms gross, subtle and causal. Gross or physical which is this world, still a projection. Subtle is the dream world, all mental. And the causal which is the deep sleep, the seed form from which all of this comes. If somebody asks, now you are equating dream and waking. Ashtavakra the sage said, neither this is real nor that is real. But dreams and waking are different. In Mandukya which is very advanced non-dualism, dreams and waking are equated. The waking is no more real than the dream. We protest immediately. We say, no, no, no, how can the waking be the same as the dream? They are different. The waking is real and the dream is not real. How so? Well, we say, in the waking world things work. So, if I am thirsty, the water in the waking world will satisfy my thirst. There is no such water in the dream world. It's a fiction. But that's not a valid comparison. If you are thirsty in the dream, which water will affect you? You may have a bottle of water next to your bed when you are sleeping. That bottle of water is not available to you in the dream. It's only the water in the dream which will quench your thirst in the dream. It is only the water in the waking which will quench your thirst in the dream. It is only the water in the waking which will quench your thirst in the waking. Feeling hungry in the dream, you left your pizza in the fridge, left over. In the dream you are feeling hungry, that pizza will not help you. You have to have food in the dream which will help you. So it is not that utility is a utility. In Sanskrit they say, atta kriya karitvam. Is it an argument for reality? No. You find utility in dream and waking alike. You cannot distinguish on the ground of utility. Another argument is, no, no, waking is real and dream is false. Why? Because all the people and the things we see in the waking world are out there. They're not in my mind and whatever I saw in the dream were in the mind, inside. What is imagined in the mind is not real. What is actually there, see there's a clock out here. It's a real clock. If I imagine a clock, that's not a real clock. So, in the dream everything is imagined. But in the waking world there are things outside my mind, outside my body. These are real things. That's again not true. The same difference between inner and outer is maintained in the dream. In the dream, don't you see people and things outside? And don't you have imaginations inside? So called inside and out. And when you wake up, the whole thing will have been imagined. The distinction between inner and outer, just externality, so called externality is not differentiated between waking and dream. It's not enough to say that the waking is real and the dream is false. In dream also things appear to be external and internal to you. Similar is another argument which comes forth is that in the waking world things are real because they are publicly. All of us see the same thing. We don't see my dreams. My dreams are private. They are my imaginations. But this waking world, don't you share a public a common shared reality a public reality I am sitting on the chair and you see the same chair too you too can come and sit on it you see it you can use it so we share a reality in the waking so the waking world is real the dream worlds are private each of each person's dream is separate that seems to be convincing at first sight but that's also not true. In one's own dream, which is private, no doubt, but in that dream the distinction between private and public is also there. If you go and meet your friend, suppose you are having coffee with your friend. You have to sit outdoor and now it's snowing or something. So if you have coffee with your friend in a cafe in Manhattan and it may be snowing and people say that, oh how can we have coffee here because it's snowing. Imagine there your friend does not say in your dream, oh all the coffee and the snow is in your mind, I can't see anything. No, in your dream you see the coffee and the snow falling and your friend also sees it. And when you wake up the whole thing was in your mind. So the public shared reality is also there in the dream. Just because it is a public shared reality does not mean that dreams are less real than the waking. No the same situation holds in dreams also So if you think in this way, it's quite eerie. It's it's creepy You know, you begin to lose the blur the difference between it becomes like science fiction Yes, so that is the Story of yes such a vosage Is this true or is that true? You are the only truth is consciousness and the universe appears to consciousness, to you the consciousness. Notice the assignment which I gave you at the beginning. The superimposition, de-superimposition, adhyaropa pavada. Which part of it is the superimposition, the superimposition. Adhyaropa Pavad. Which part of it is the superimposition? When the king Janaka, Emperor Janaka, he thought that I have been defeated and I have lost my empire and he was sad about it. And he thought that this is my... I am still in the court and surrounded by my courtiers and everything waking and dreaming and he was confused which is real, is this real or is that real? Both of them are superimpositions, both of them have tied, so called tied the donkey and the de-superimposition when Ashtavakra comes and tells him neither that is real nor this is real. You are the reality. That is the de-superimposition. Apavada. Adhyaropa Apavada, by the method of superimposition, de-superimposition. Superimposition we have already done ourselves. Janaka had already done waking, dreaming. But because he was a philosopher, he had viveka, the discernment, he had the question, is this really true? We go from dream to dream and take it to be true. First the dream, Janaka's dream that seemed to be true. Then he comes to waking, that also seems to be true. Janaka questioned and thereupon came the answer, neither of them is true. That is the de-superimposition, untying the donkey. All the time Janaka was consciousness itself. Neither the defeated one rolling on the ground and crying ha ha kaara nor the glorious one sitting on the throne surrounded by courtiers. Both are appearances, both are movies playing on the one consciousness. Gathuria. Okay. This consciousness which we are, how to realize that? How to break away from the body-mind identification? So that's the next story. This is the even more well-known story of the 10th man. Here, I mean, this the 10th man story you find in many places. Actually, there is a textual reference. For example, in the Panchadashi Vidyaranya mentions the 10th man story and he makes a big deal out of it. So the 10th man story is well-known. 10 friends were on a journey and they crossed a river and after having crossed the river they thought, did we all cross safely or did anybody drown? Let's count. One of them counted. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine. Oh my God, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine. Oh my God, our tenth person has drowned. Our poor friend is dead. The others said, you're not counting right, let me count. Each one counted and they found only nine people. Obviously they were not counting themselves. And they sat down and started crying. The tenth, our friend, the tenth man is dead, has drowned. Along comes the wise person and says why are you crying my friends? Oh we were ten on a journey and our 10th person, our friend has drowned. How do you know that? We counted and we found only 9. And this person must have counted them and found that there were 10 people sitting and crying and he realised what had happened. So he tells them, don't cry my friends, the 10th person is there. Where, where? Don't cry, relax, believe me. You see, this is where the teaching comes from the scriptures and the Guru. Tenth person is there, the reality is there, God is there, Atman is there. We don't know yet. It's still theoretical for us. We are just hearing this. So they are saying, yes, alright, we'll believe you, but where? We don't find him. I'll show you. Count. We counted. There were only nine. Humor me. Count again. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine. And this wise man comes and turns the hand and says, Dawad the tenth. Ten. And the counter goes, oh, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten. Oh, I found the tenth person, that's wonderful. And the others say, let me try, let me try. And they all try and they find the tenth person. And they are all happy. Now this story points to two things. One, the exact precise nature of enlightenment. And two, the entire spiritual journey. First of all, the crucial teaching about how to know ourselves as the witness consciousness. So take up any method of Vedantic inquiry, the method of the five sheets of the human personality or even the waking, dreaming, deep sleep which we talked about. The five sheets, the physical body, the vital body, the mental body, the intellect and the bliss body, the annamaya, pranamaya, manomaya, vijnanamaya and the anandamaya. Are you this body? You start with what is most obvious, what is most external, what everybody knows. Yes, who are you? Where are you? Here. What is this? This is is everybody knows. Yes, who are you, where are you? Here. What is this? This is me. It is I. What are you? This. Start with the body. And then we are shown how we cannot be the body. We are not the baby's body and the child's body and the teenager's body, middle age and old age. I identify with each one. I say I am the same one. The two are not alike. They are very different from each other. And yet I say I am that one, that one and that one. Therefore I, the unchanging and the completely changing body, I cannot be the same. The changing and unchanging, they cannot be the same thing. I am making a mistake here. Not only that, the body is something that I'm aware of. I am aware of the body. The body is not aware of me. So I am consciousness, awareness, the body is non-conscious, insentient. Not only that, it's an object. I am the seer, the body is the seen. So because of these reasons, in Sanskrit, Savikara and Nirvikara, with change, without change. Drishya and Drashta, seer and the seen. Chetana and Jada, sentient and insentient. Because of these reasons, I cannot be the body. The body is here, but I am not the body. I am the unchanging conscious seer. The body is ever-changing, not conscious and it's the seen, the object. Then our attention is directed inwards. Let the body be like a sheath. The pranamaya, the breath, the life forces. The most obvious of which is the breath. Am I the breath? Am I life itself? And the same arguments can be applied. It is changing, it is an object, it is not conscious. You are unchanging, you are the subject and you are conscious. How can you be the breath? Then our attention is directed inwards, further inwards. Not the Anandamaya, not the Pranamaya, but the mind. Am I the mind? Most people identify with the mind. I'm the person, this person's mind. The thinker, the one who feels, one who collects all perceptions, seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, that mind. Am I that? Again, same thing. Mind is ever-changing. Happy mind, sad mind. I'm happy, I'm sad. I'm the same one who was happy and I'm the same one who's sad now. I'm the same one. The mind has changed so much. From childhood till now, the mind has changed so much. Imagine the thoughts we had when we were little kids. Imagine the feelings we had when we were little kids. The memories we had at one time. Very different from the thoughts, feelings and memories which we have now. Which mind am I? He said, no, no Swami, you are confusing us. I was that mind and I am this one now. But the two are entirely different. How can you be the same and be entirely different at the same time? The one monk who was teaching said this in I am both. remain the same. It's logically impossible. So I'm not the mind. Am I the intellect which is doing all this inquiry? Same thing, changing, object, non-sentient, insentient. I am the unchanging subject and conscious. I am aware. It is something I'm aware of. I cannot be the intellect, not the Vijnanamaya. Then the blankness beyond that which is experienced in deep sleep, Sushupti, Anandamaya, not even that for the same reasons. And here the Upanishad keeps quiet. From Taittiri Upanishad this teaching is there. We are supposed to see the Atman, the pure consciousness. We are waiting, it will be revealed to us, grosser to subtler to subtler to causal and then the Atman, no. The Upanishad says nothing. Then I don't exist. You see, all that I thought I was now has been revealed to be not me. It's there but it's not me. Then who am I? Then the Upanishad asks you to turn inwards to the witness of the five, the five sheets. You see, why did the counter, one who was counting the nine people, why did he not find the tenth one? Our answer will be, because he did not count himself. Correct, but why did he not count himself? Where was he expecting to find the tenth one? He, this is very crucial, he was expecting to find the 10th one? This is very crucial. He was expecting to find the 10th one out there. Why? Why was he so foolish? Because he is not foolish at all. He is very reasonable. He is operating on the principle, where he found the other 9, the 10th one should also be there. Where else will it be? 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, the 10th one should be there, not there. four five six seven eight nine the tenth one should be there not there because everything that he found was objective it's trained into thinking habituated into thinking that whatever exists must be an object but what about he himself the subject is one thing which is not an object similarly whatever we thought of ourselves as body and the vital forces, the mind, the intellect, and even beyond the intellect, the blankness, they are all objects. Ask yourself, to whom? That is the turning. At that point you have to do it intuitively. Vedanta has done as much as possible, taken you to the very verge of that luminous gap between object and subject. The next step must be yours. You must intuitively grasp. I am the awareness to which the five sheaths appear. I am the awareness to which waking, dreaming and deep sleep appear. I am that fourth to which the waker, dreamer and deep sleep appear I am that forth to which the waker dreamer and deep sleepers appear and disappear so that turning inwards that's what the tenth man stories shows then Vidyaranya shows the entire spiritual journey in Vedanta first step in seven stages through that that story seven stages of the spiritual journey in Vedanta. First step, Ajnaana, ignorance. They did not know that the tenth man was there. They were not aware of the tenth man being there. Similarly, we do not know of ourselves as the Atman, as being consciousness bliss, as unlimited. We don't know. Somehow we don't know. We are born with this ignorance. Shankaracharya says in his Brahma Sutra Bhashya introduction, he says, naisargya ko vayam loka-vyavahara. Naisargya means natural. We are born with natural ignorance about our own nature. He did not know. That's step one. Next what happens? Not knowing the existence of the tenth man, they fall into the error. Ignorance leads to error. In Sanskrit, ajnana to adhyasa. What is the error? He is drowned. Drowned. The tenth man is drowned. We are led into error. What is the error? Not knowing that we are pure consciousness, we are presented with a body and mind. The error, I am this body and mind. Its hunger is my hunger. Not that I am the awareness of the hunger, which is the truth actually, but I am hungry. Its pain is my pain. Not that I am aware of the pain. It's I am in pain. It hurts. I am in hurt. It starts naturally as babies. So I identify with it directly. You don't have to go to ignorance school to learn ignorance. You have to go to knowledge school to learn knowledge. The ignorance is Shankaracharya says naturally it comes. Ignorance to error. Second stage is error. Agyana to Adhyasa. What happens? The man is dead, is drowned. Not there, therefore drowned. Third stage, sorrow. They sit down and cry, Allah, Allah, our poor friend, he drowned. Now we have lost our friend, the tenth man. This is called Samsara. Not knowing our real nature, we make the error. Third stage, Dukkha. Samsara, I am old, I am sick, I am poor, I am dying, nobody loves me, I am a failure, I am alone in the world, all false, totally, totally false, this is Samsara. This is the third stage, Samsara This is the third stage samsara fourth stage the guru comes and tells The tenth man is there That is tenth man is there. He tells the truth The guru the open issue that comes Vedanta comes and tells us that there is you are the Atman That to a Massey you are the Atman, there is the Atman which is existence, consciousness, bliss. This is called Paroksha Gyan, the indirect knowledge. The stage at which we are told, we don't know yet, we read it, we hear of it, we admit that this could be a possibility, but we don't see it. That's the stage at which those travellers said, where is the tenth man? You are saying the tenth man is still there. We need not cry. The Guru says do not grieve. God exists, Brahman exists, that Atman is there. You are actually free right now. There is no sorrow right now. But we see sorrow, we see suffering. How is it that I am free of suffering right now? I will show you. This is paroksha jnana. Then comes the aparoksha jnana, the direct, the showing. Please count 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Thou art the tenth. Dasamastu Amasi in Sanskrit. Thou art the tenth. Oh, I am the tenth. This is called Aparoksha Gyana. Direct knowledge. When the Guru shows and you practice it, you notice the physical self, the I am not the body, the vital body, I am not that, the mental body, I am not that, the intellect body, I am not that, the blankness, I am not that. The intellect body, I am not that. The blankness beyond the intellect, the causal body, I am not that. And intuitively you grasp the consciousness. Grasp means you are, I am that consciousness. I am the awareness of all of them. All the problems of the body are in the body. All the problems of the mind are in the mind. All the ignorance and confusion are in the intellect. I am the witness of all of that. I am free of ill health, Covid. I am free of hunger and thirst. I am free of depression and frustration. I am free of ignorance and confusion. See the five sheets, the problems associated with them. I am free of ignorance and confusion. See the five sheets, the problems associated with them. I am the witness of them. I am not saying that they are not there. Those things are there in where they belong. One Uttarakhand sadhu put it very beautifully. He said the solution in Vedanta is to keep things in their own place. Ill health, put it in its own place, don't put it on yourself. It doesn't belong to you, it belongs to the body. See, no denial, no escapism. Ill health is there in the body, it has to be treated, taken care of. Do yoga, go to the doctor, whatever has to be done. But it's in the body, it belongs to the body. Be clear about that. Put it where it belongs. Put things in their own place. Don't put things on yourself which don't belong there. So this is the Aparoksha Jnana, the direct realization. The difference between telling and showing. I have a talk coming up later next week. Methodology of teaching in Vedanta, that's a unique methodology of teaching in Vedanta. Not just a book, not just a lecture, not just a talk or a power point or chalk and blackboard, but actually showing what did the teacher do. Tenth man, that thou art. He didn't just say there is the tenth man, you are the tenth man and go away. He showed what you are not and what you are. So that is called Aparoksha Gihana, direct realization. That's the fifth stage. The sixth stage is Dukkha Nivritti, sorrow is gone. Oh the tenth man has been found. Thank God, they stop crying. Sorrow is gone. I cannot die. Poverty and ill health do not affect me. Things done and not done. This is an enlightened person characteristic. Interesting characteristic of an enlightened person mentioned in the Upanishad. He is not worried about what's been done and not done. The to-do list it tears up and throws away Nothing there none of that is there you are always complete the doing and not doing things left undone and things which have been done neither of them can complete you or diminish you in the least so complete you or diminish you in the least. So, sorrow is gone. There is nothing to be sorry about. Even the past, still now I realize I am alright. But in the past so much suffering, that suffering also was not necessary. There is no reality to that. Like the suffering in a dream. I was alright then too. And because I am the underlying reality of the universe, universe also, everybody in the universe was alright, is alright, is going to be alright. Perfectly alright. Then what happens? Seventh stage. Ananda prapti, bliss, joy, fulfillment. This very unlimited nature of the Atman which is realized, that itself is joy. There is nothing lacking anymore. A sense of fulfillment comes. An unshakable, such a secure sense of fulfillment, it cannot be affected by anything in the world, external or internal in the mind. Nothing can affect that fulfillment. Even in the worst of sorrows, Gita says, na dukkhe na guru na api vichalrows Gita says cannot be affected so seven stages ignorance then error and then the sorrow then the indirect teaching the knowledge you get from teachers and books and then the direct realization then the direct realization. Then the Dukkha Nivritti, sorrow is removed. And then finally the Ananda Prapti. Of course, Dukkha Nivritti, Ananda Prapti, they come immediately. Immediately after direct realization. Seven stages, all illustrated by the story of the tenth man. Such a wonderful story, you see. The whole of Vedanta is packed into it. The stages of spiritual life, the methodology of difference between telling and showing something, that skill in teaching and the direct, the exact nature of enlightenment that turn in words, those five I am NOT, the five sheets, three states of waking, dreaming, deep sleep, I am NOT. The causal, the subtle and the gross, I am NOT. I am the one to which whom they appear. That turn, intuitive turn, it's all illustrated by this one story. Again try that superimposition, desuperimposition, your assignment. What was the superimposition? That the tenth man is dead and consequent sorrow. What is the desuperimposition? The tenth man is alive and showing that I am the tenth. That same tying the donkey and untying the donkey. You see the same thing is going on here not one bit different. Then the fourth story where the result of all enlightenment is shown. How is it that realizing I am the Atman will solve all my problems? All desires are fulfilled by realization of Brahman. So vashnute sarvaan kaamansah brahmana vipaschate ti The Hittari Upanishad says, the one who realizes Brahman, I am Brahman. All desires are fulfilled at once. How? All sorrow and lack is removed at once. How? Just by knowing something, how is that all desires fulfilled? Something we are running after crazily throughout our lives. How can it be fulfilled all at once, at one instant and forever? Through the story of the Princess of Kashi. Another golden oldie. So, in one ancient Indian kingdom, a theatrical performance was staged in the king's court and one of the characters was supposed to be the princess of Kashi. Kashi is Benares, the ancient spiritual city. So, the princess of Kashi, this play is not in Kashi, it's in some other kingdom and the princess of Kashi is supposed to be a character in that play. Now, the queen said, who is going to play? The princess of Kashi is supposed to be a character in that play. Now the Queen said, who is going to play the little girl? Who is going to play the little girl? The Queen said, well the Prince, her son, was 5 years old at that time. You can dress him up as a girl. He looks cute, we will put him and dress him up as a princess and he will be the Princess of Kashi. And that's how it happened and the play was staged successfully. The prince looked so cute in the princess's dress that the queen said, paint a photograph. Nowadays, photography or photograph. But in those days you had to get the coat painter and the prince had to pose in the dress. And the painter painted him. Prince is of Kashi, dated so and so. Big portrait was made. 15 years passed. The prince grew up and was doing all kinds of princely things, riding and shooting arrows and learning and things like that. One day while exploring the palace he went down to an attic, to a cellar, an old place where junk was kept and he found this old painting. He wiped the dust of it and he saw the Princess of Kashi and saw the date 15 years ago. Oh she must be my age now and he fell in love with her. I will marry this, she will be my queen. Without her I will not be happy in this life. Now he is too shy to tell his mother or his father but he moped and he wouldn't pay attention to his studies or his training as the prince and everybody noticed that the prince is not happy but why? He wouldn't say. So one day a wise old minister took him aside and said Prince what ails you? You can tell me, confide in me. He said I am in love. Oh good who is she? She is the princess of Kashi. Oh good a princess even better. Where did you meet her? He said I haven't met her but I saw her picture and it's an old picture I mean but she's my age clearly the date shows she must be my age. The minister said old picture princess of Kashi can you take me to that picture and the prince took him down into the cellar and showed him the picture and the minister said Prince you need to sit down. Why? He told him that this is not the Princess of Kashi. Whoever she is I will marry her. No wait. There was this theatrical performance 15 years ago and the role of the Princess of Kashi, your mother the Queen she said to dress you up in the princess's dress and we dressed you up And it was painted and this is that painting that thou art tat tvam asi You are that And of course the princess the problem was entirely solved immediately, but question is how was the problem solved? Did the prince marry the princess of Kashi and then his desire was fulfilled? No. Did he find out that the princess of Kashi is dead or married to somebody else and so he cannot be fulfilled? You see, fulfillment of desire and frustration of desire, these are the two things that happen in the world. Neither of them are solutions. Then how was it fulfilled? He realized that there is no princess of Kashi apart from him. All along he himself was the princess of Kashi. This world is our princess of Kashi. Swami Vivekananda says things are dead in themselves. We breathe life into them, then we run after them or run away from them. Not just attraction, fear also, repulsion also, terror also. All of those things are like the princess of Kashi. It's not a thing apart from you. It is you dressed up in the form of temptation or terror. Temptation, I run towards it. It's a mirage apart from me. It's nothing there apart from me. Terror, I run away from it. It's a mirage apart from me. There's nothing there that can harm me, harm me the consciousness. Once we realize that this whole universe becomes one with me like the princess of Kashi became one with the prince and realize that all the time just because of error we thought outside, but actually it is one and the same. I am that. There is none of that outside me. No matter how tempting, no matter how scary, how attractive or how repulsive, it's all me. Everybody is I. Every object is I. Every event is I. I means the one consciousness which is common to all of us. This grand teaching it solves the problem of desire once and for all. It shows the problem of desire to be a mirage. It shows that fulfillment is our eternally ours. We are eternally fulfilled. We projected outside ourselves. We identify with one body and mind and we say now I need those those those things I am afraid of those those those things and Then samsara starts for us Again notice hypnotized dehypnotized superimposition de superimposition What was the superimposition the prince thought there is a princess of Kashi. I Superimposition, the prince thought there is a princess of Kashi, I am in love with her and I have to marry her then only I will be happy. Superimposition Samsara started. Desuperimposition, Jagat Mithya, the world is an appearance appearance of what? Of you. You are appearing in a mirror is your own reflection you are now scared of your reflection or attracted to your reflection. That reflection is nothing of your reflection or attracted to your reflection. That reflection is nothing apart from you. That is de-superimposition. Tying the donkey and untying the donkey. Just the illusion had to be cleared up. The problem had... question is not to be solved, it's to be dissolved. What is the solution? The solution is there is the princess of Kashi and now we must give her a proposal and get married, get the prince married to the princess of Kashi. That's the solution. Or it's a failure that maybe she's already married and there's no possibility of you marrying the princess of Kashi. That's solution, successful or failure. But that's not true. That's still within the mirage. The truth is there is no princess of Kashi apart from you That is the untying the donkey same method Adhya roopa pavad abhyam nishprapancham prapanchate By the method of superimposition and de-superimposition is the transcendent thought imposition is the transcendent thought. Final story, fifth story. This is a real golden oldie because Swami Vivekananda is one of his favorite stories and it sums up the whole of Vedanta very nicely. Now it's a very popular story even children they read about it and it can be applied, you don't have to apply just to Advaita Vedanta it's something that we can interpret in any context. It's a very positive story. So this lioness who was hunting a flock of sheep, she jumped on the sheep and she was heavy with young and she died and gave birth to a cub. And the lion cub, little cub, its mother was dead and it was surrounded by sheep and the sheep took care of it and it slowly grew up thinking it was a sheep too. And over time it bleated like the sheep, it made sheep friends and it ate grass and walked around in the herd of sheep till it grew to be this huge young lion but it still moved around with the sheep and ate grass Now one day, this big old lion was hunting and saw a flock of sheep, was going to attack them and eat and then it saw in the middle of the sheep, this huge young lion magnificent, handsome young lion but bleating like the sheep and eating grass and the old lion was very puzzled What's going on here? So he carefully stalked the flock of sheep and isolated the young lion and ran after it and the sheep ran, bleating in fear and the young lion also ran, bleating in fear till the old lion went up to it and got pounced upon him and caught him and dragged him off away from the herd of sheep and said why are you behaving like this you are a lion just as much as I am and the young lion said oh sir please let me go you're scaring me said but no but you are a lion why are you bleating no I'm not a lion, I'm a sheep. Will you come with me? And he takes him and shows him in a pool of water what I am that you are also. Look at my face and look at your face. At first the young lion was scared and trembling and he saw, Oh, same face, lion's face there and my face is same thing. I am a lion too. Now roar like me and he roared and the young lion also roared and realized his identity as a lion. Remember, he was a lion to begin with. What is the sheep? Material universe, the five elements. In the midst of the five elements, earth, water, fire, air, space, this physical body and the vital body and the mind, in sitting in the midst of that I, the consciousness, I also think I am like this. I am this material creature, subject to all change and destruction and death, limitation and sorrow. And when I am confronted by the universe, I get scared. I am so tiny, I am so helpless, I am so limited. Born just the other day and now going to be extinguished. just the other day and not going to be extinguished. And then the Guru comes, the Upanishad comes, Vedanta comes and says you are the lion of Vedanta, you are not a material creature. Vedanta Kesari, Vedanta Kesari means the lion of Vedanta. Roar, what is the roar? Aham brahmasmi, I am Brahman. Not that I have to become Brahman, I am a little creature, now I have to become the infinite, that's a big job. No, I am already that. I have to awaken to my true nature. Sooner we do it, the better for us. So that was Swami Vivekananda's story of the lion, the Vedantic lion which is our true nature. Again notice the tying of the donkey and the untying of the donkey. The lion which thought it was a sheep that's tying the donkey and it was taught that you are not the sheep you are a lion that's untying the donkey. All throughout the donkey was free. All throughout the lion was the lion. All throughout the princess of Kashi was one with the prince. All throughout the tenth man was there. You yourself are the tenth man you are mourning for. All throughout Janaka Raja was free of the waking and the dreaming. He was the consciousness but had to be shown. So these wonderful stories they show us, they point to our real nature. That is the very methodology of Advaita Vedanta. So, a storytelling session? Swami Vijnananda, I was reading, the disciple of Sri Ramakrishna, there is a place where devotees are gathered around him. He was the President of the Order at that time, 1930s. He says, Swami, tell us a story. Swami curtly says, a story? Who do you think I am, your grandmother? But then he tells a wonderful story. He says, this world is a story. Don't you see, it's a fairy tale. Once you see that, you will be happy. So today I've done the grandmother role, telling this grand old stories of Vedanta. God knows since when they have been passed down from teacher to student. I pray to the Lord, to Sri Ramakrishna, to the Holy Mother, to Swami Vivekananda to bless us with that Vedantic insight to set free the donkey, untie the donkey, to set us free, to show us the glory within and the glory outside everywhere that one infinite being and consciousness and bliss. God Bless.
