 This This is NRCVEE module, special module on leadership, VE 733, it is a one credit module. I will say more about logistics, right, I hope everyone is in the right place, right, for the for the course. And so, let me introduce the speaker first, we have Pravarajika Divya Nandapranaji. And she has been interacting with IIT for at least I would say last 2 to 3 years. She is an excellent speaker, very motivating person. She has spoken on number of occasions at IIT through talks organized by Vivekananda study circle and other groups on campus on a variety of topics, you know, which are relevant to students and, you know, not just being effective effective here but also in long term. She is a monastic member of Ram Krishna Sharda Mission and she is based in Delhi very close to IIT Delhi. There is a school Nivedita Vidya Mandir. She is principal of that. She is also editor of a journal called Sambit and she is very well versed not only in traditional Indian scriptures or you know knowledge but also in modern science. She has spoken not just in IIT but also abroad in many universities on various forums on a variety of topics, right. And one such topic is the topic of this course. She also took a class module last year on science of happiness and even did that module, yeah, right. And I think we received a really good feedback from students. We thought this is another opportunity for students to delve deeper into another topic. Let me also say a little bit about the course itself. So this is the title of the course as you would have seen in the email is Karma Yoga, Art of Effective Leadership, right. And right, I mean, many of us would have read about the term Karma Yoga and people might have their different interpretations but in this course I think the primary focus would be twofold that understanding what is the right action right and also how does that right action help us take the right decisions right. So those two things are very important and the course will delve both into the philosophical aspects of it understanding understanding karma or action, right, what does it mean, what is the right in what context from a philosophical perspective but also from a practical perspective, right. I feel as students when I remember my undergrad in IIT Bombay almost 20 years back now, right, there are so many choices, right, so many choices in terms of, you know, what to do, when to do, time management, listening to seniors or professors, right and it gets very confusing, especially in first or second year, even later and not just here, later on when you go for jobs, research, right, what are the right decisions and I feel that it is both, it is opportunity as well as a challenge. It is a challenge because we do not know what is right and what is wrong. It is an opportunity because if we take the right decision then we are set on the right path to be effective not just for ourselves but also for the world or the society in the long term. So hopefully this course will delve deeper into those specific aspects from a student perspective as I said from a philosophical perspective also but also taking examples from student life, what kind of challenges or dilemmas that we face and how do we really handle with them. It will also involve talking about great leaders from India and abroad, right, what people have thought about and how they have been effective, taking their examples, right. And so this is sort of the g you to this course. You heard about the details from Parag sir. I would just like to mention one or two points before we start. We are keeping the course entirely interactive which means you can stop me at any point and ask relevant questions. We have a huge syllabus to cover because there are certain points which NRCV wants me to cover in this course. So, I will be continuing accordingly, but if you have more doubts you can always meet us separately or you can ask the question right here, all right. This is one thing and then this course is spread out over 9 sessions. In each session I am trying to club 3, 4 related topics ah. You just heard briefly about the topics let me also mention them here. First of all we we will be discussing what karma is, is it the same as action? See most of our life we are only going to do action is not it? Action is everything and what exactly is karma then does it mean the same thing the definition the types of action that we do the effects of these actions all this we will be discussing exhaustively we usually do not think too much of the effects we only want the immediate consequences is not it that is why we perform actions, but every action throws a lot of effects. So, we will be studying all of that. Then we will be studying the right and wrong of an action. You see when you have to take a decision, you must know the right and wrong of it, isn't it? So, it is important to study the ethics behind karma. A theory of ethics we will be studying and we will also be studying the theory of causation. I do not know if you have heard of it. Causation theory is fundamental to it's the universal law of karma. So we will be studying that. In addition, we will be studying the concept of duty. What does duty mean and what does swadharma mean as a result and IIT students especially I have been asked to focus on this. What would be your self-duty? What should be your duty towards your family, towards your nation, towards the world as a whole? And what should you prioritize in your life? How should your decisions be? What is it that is making you take those decisions? And how are you going to regulate all those factors, what should be the criteria used for it taking decisions and also how do you develop your will power to implement those decisions to execute whatever you decide. So, development of will power will be a very big session, may be two sessions in this module. All this we will be studying. In addition to this, we will also be studying the lives, incidents from the lives of great leaders. Just to show you examples and we will be taking, drawing insights from the Bhagavad Gita. Because as you know, Bhagavad Gita is a very practical manual for Karma Yoga, isn't it? You see where it is laid out. it is laid out in a battlefield and it is giving you tremendous insights as to what a duty, what duty means and what the duty of a soldier. You see there Arjun is a soldier and he is being provoked, he is being urged to fight, to fight and kill and so, how this becomes the duty of a soldier and this is positive karma for the soldier. So, how all this works ah all this we will be exhaustively discussing. Now, as I told you you can ask questions in the middle, but make them very relevant to the topic you understand because every session we are going to cover a lot many things. Now, first of all let me start with You will also be studying how to make choices You see when you have to make a decision You have to come to certain definite choices, isn't it? How do you make choices? How choices work for you? How free is your ability to make a choice? Is there something called a free will or it's all conditioned free will? You must have heard this word free will. Is there a free will or not? Because there is a huge debate whether it's all determinism or is it all predetermined? Or is there something called free will? Can I make the ultimate decisions of my life? Or are there forces holding me back? What are the causal decisions of my life or are there forces holding me back? What are the causal equations of karma? What what are the consequences of actions? How do I set the ball rolling and what happens as a result? Why do we find ourselves in this particular place today? You see you are in a position very advantageous position where you are getting some of the very best things of life, you are in IIT, you are getting the best exposures in knowledge and you have a great future ahead of you. So, if you set the right forces in motion, you can do enormous work, you will be the leaders of tomorrow, all this will be placed in the context of leadership. How you will be the great leaders of tomorrow, how you will be able to take great decisions for our nation, for the globe as a whole and what are the qualities of leadership, the qualities of excellency in human life. All this will be it the subject matter of this course will be placed in the context of leadership ok. So, this is what we are going to study. Let us start with the basic definitions. What is karma? Karma is it just work, any action is karma or is there something more? Think and see, any action can it become karma or jab hum bohot baar hum aisa use karte hain ki yeh mera karma hai kya karein. And when we use it as a means of doing something, we mean it in a very specific sense. We did not get what we wanted, so it is not because of karma. You see, karma comes from the Sanskrit dhatu, kri, iska matlab hai karna, to do, to do something is karma. So then many things are doing, you see your mobile phone, all the time it's doing your shopping, it's doing your banking, it's doing your teaching and learning everything, so is it doing great karma? Or your laptop? Or say a waterfall, is it doing great karma or your laptop or say a waterfall is it doing great karma they are all doing actions but when we call it as karma when they are doing it with awareness if something is doing it with awareness then only it becomes karma your laptop or your mobile phone is programmed to do a particular thing so it is not exactly doing Karma. If you are doing it willfully and with awareness then it becomes Karma. It is going to generate Karma phal. If you have just programmed something to do work for you that thing is not generating Karma. This is the difference. Samajh mein aa raha hai. For something to do work for you that thing is not generating karma this is the difference. For something to become karma what what is required first of all a living agent yes and willful action not compulsive action willfully done a self-aware entity performing willful action. So it is a volitional operation. Volition means willing. It's a volitional expression and then you call it Karma. So this is the difference in action which you see in nature. Everything is acting. Everything is in motion. But a human being can generate karma through karma karma fall only because he is it is under his will and he is a self-aware entity this is the point a bald Sundar tariqat a bhagavad-gita media gaya this given in the bhagavad-gita the factors which make an act a karma Adi shanam tatha karta karanam cha prithak vidham, vividhas cha prithak cheshta daivam chaivatra panchamam. This is the shloka in the Bhagavad Gita which means to say Adhistanam first of all there must be a body or a mind to do the work a living entity k, a living entity with functioning as an agent for the work. Adishtanam tata karta karanam, using faculties, you are using your sensory and motor organs to do work. Karanam cha prithak vidham, vividhascha prithak cheshta, using all various faculties, you are functioning through them. And daivam, chaivatra panch Panchamah means there is a ah an element of Daivam here actually means the latency of past action or you can say the ability to produce fruit which comes through divine will. Any action if it is producing a certain fruit then it is called a karma if it is capable of producing karma phal aap dekho nai a waterfall is not going to get karmaphal. Your mobile is not going to get karmaphal with all the work it is doing. But you are going to get the results of your actions. That means what? That means you are in charge of your actions. Once you are a major, you are responsible for your actions. There is an element of choice in every action, it has been willfully done. You may say no it was impulsive and compulsive, we will study impulsiveness, compulsiveness all this exhaustively because we are going to study the psychology of all these aspects that is what is practically useful to you and of course, a bit of philosophy also we are going to study, but exactly how do we come to perform action, how the intention behind our action decides the fruit of that action. You understand the intention of your action decides the fruit of that action like this we are going to study Karma Yoga and it is most in depth study of Karma Karma Yoga you will find in the Gita because as I told you it is a manual not just for invoking the Rajasic spirit in Arjun, it is a actual manual for effective leadership, it is a manual for effective work for character development and so, it throws enormous insights into all of this. So, through the Bhagavad Gita we will try to study one thing let me ah make it very clear here. You see once you understand the ideal of Karma Yog, you can use a work either to bind you karma either to bind you or to liberate you. What is the meaning of this? Karma ek hi cheeze, the action is one thing. performance of work, the performance you are able to show. Is not it? Who is a leader? The best performer is the leader. Is not it? Aapka karma hi aapka parichay hai, that is your signature, that is your distinctness. Your work shows who you are, how your mind is working, what capacity of sustained concentration you have. So, it is actually defining you, is a defining element about you. So, how you perform your action and what is the result of that action that decides how successful you will be in life. So, this is the basic psychology of success also which we will be studying. If I have to be an effective leader, I must be able to handle my mind in such a way that the net effect is so positive, something so effective that naturally people are able to follow you. You see a leader is a person whom people are whom people naturally follow not out of compulsion isn't it. So for this capacity to come in you must be to a great extent in charge of your personality in charge of your decisions perfectly. Aise waise choices nahi karte. Jaise aapne IIT ko chuna aur rather IIT ne aapko chuna. Why you had sufficient marks isn't it you had the sufficient capacity to come in here. So also if you are able to make conscious choices, then only you become a high performer, then only you become a leader and you create a great destiny. If you are not able to make conscious choices, you are driven to make choices, you only create fate. Fate ka matlab ye hi hai. Consciously nothing happened. Various forces drove me towards a particular destination. So, it is my fate if you are aware alert wide awake and willful the will is well developed and you focus on a particular goal. So, you see concentration will discrimination, discrimination come at the way we wake if all this is well developed you will be a natural leader and this is the secret of leadership actually. So, Karma Yoga actually helps you develop leadership qualities. Agar theek theek tarah se samjho Karma Yoga ko, it will take you very far in life. A leader has this naturally foresight, foresight, even hindsight, able to see all sides together. So, this capacity will come as you go on understanding Karma Yoga and performing it accordingly. You see Karma Yoga is all about performance, but here we are going to study how to perform. So, that it becomes a Yoga. Yoga is it is going to unite you with a great goal. If you can convert your everyday action into a means to unite yourself with something very elevating, some high purpose a great goal in your life, bringing a great a lot of good to other people. Running a company in such a way not just you meet with the profit expectations of the company, but running it inspirationally. So, that people take inspiration from you, affecting good to a large number of people maximizing the happiness of countless people if you can work in such a way you see your karma has become yog there it will take you very high even in spirituality karma yog ka matlab yahi hai in some way you are able to convert your everyday action into a method for elevating your consciousness Achieving a great goal in life Then it becomes a yoga, it is not just a karma When you enter your workplace, you will see 9 to 5 jobs Most of the time, most of the energy has gone into work. If you can find a means to convert work in such a way, so that this 9 to 5 job itself brings you the highest success here and great fulfillment within. Abhyudaya and Nishre as it is called in Sanskrit. If it can bring you both of this then Karma Yoga study has been fulfilled This is the purpose of Karma Yoga So for that we will go step by step See the very ideal of Karma Yoga is There are two things How do you convert a Karma into a Yoga What are those two things? First of all the detachment of the will You know action is about willing Yes We learnt this action is about willing If that will is a detachment of the will you know action is about willing yes we learn this action is about willing if that will is a little detached from what detachment is always of the will detached from what from merely personal gain if it is a little detached from that if it is able to contribute to others, if it does not simply hold things for itself, you will see whatever action you do becomes of the nature of yoga. Iske liye thoda analysis of human personality also we will do. What is the human personality structure like? Why should I not ah expect the best for myself? Why should I share it with others? Why should I contribute to others? Then only if my karma is going to become a yoke, why should I do all of this? So, this question also this also we will be dwelling upon any karma will become a yoke if naturally it is disposed towards not just towards yourself or your ego, but it is for a larger consciousness is a it is for a larger section of humanity, then you will see your action itself becomes a means to your liberation a means towards an elevating goal in life. This is a possibility you can convert karma into yoga, your job itself is enough to take you to the highest goals of life. So, this is the ideal of Karma Yoga. Before we go into the the characteristics of leaders who have successfully done this, let me tell you a few effects of your actions. We may know a lot about Karma Yoga. We have heard of this and that, but basic thing about Karma we do not know. Whenever you perform a work, certain effects are thrown out. Usually you do not pay. Whenever you perform a work, certain effects are thrown out. Usually you do not pay attention to the effects. See now suppose I am you are studying for an assignment and your friend comes and says he wants to be helped with something some mathematics problem. You help that friend. Now you do not think of anything beyond helping him is not it? He asked for help, you helped him. Now, in this small action of helping your friend in his particular problem, you know how many effects are being thrown out. With this example, let me tell you the effects. You see the very first effect is you helped your friend, usne achha kiya apne exam mein. So, that is the good fruit of that action that by helping your friend, there is an external effect, You did a good job in your exam But there is one more thing has happened with what motive you helped your friend that has become a sanskar in your mind please try to see this the motive with which you helped your friend that has become a strong mental impression in your mind see you might have helped your friend because he is your friend isn't it? he asked for help so this friendship caring sharing this became a sanskar in your mind he will help you, he will make you generous, generosity became your nature as a result of that action or you might have helped that friend because your teacher told you to help him so then here what will be the Sanskar in your mind? Obedience to the teacher, not friendliness. That became a Sanskar in your mind. Or you might have helped your friend because just expecting that well, when I have a problem he will help me. Then barter became a Sanskar in your mind. You understand? What was your motive behind that action? Accordingly your Sanskars are created that is why in Bhagavad Gita it is said again and again that intention and motive is so important, that is the internal effect of that particular work any work has two effects, external effect is visible, you get the external effect immediately kshipram hi manoshay loke siddhir bhavati karmaja, immediately you know the external effect, the internal effect is it has generated a very good very solid mental impression for you a sanskar has been created in your mind this is the second effect of the work. And there is a third effect also which is not at all visible what is the third effect it is called a cosmic effect . If you do a good act with a good intention at some point of time it will come back to you. When you need help you will get help. This is Newton's third law of motion isn't it? For every action there is equal and opposite reaction. Hum bahot baar hum soste hain. Well if I do a good action, what do I get out of it? You see this third law, third aspect of this, it is irrefutable. Whatever force you put into motion, it is going to come back to you. It will naturally come back to you. What you sow, that you are going to reap. So this is the third effect of karma. It is called invisible. Because it hai kyunki yeh dikhai nahi deta you are not able to see this third effect of work why are you not able to see it because it's a cosmic effect you have thrown out a positive force it will come back to you at some point of time you see today you are in such good circumstances and situation you are having such a wonderful education all this is a result of very good karma in the past. Obviously, hm it comes back to you as good effects at any point of time it can come back to you. So, you see you have put these forces into motion. So, what are the three effects of karma? First is the physical and immediate effect the the external effect, okay, it's quite visible. The second effect is it creates the sanskars in your mind. Action immediately creates your mental attitudes. Sanskar ka matlab kya hai? Mental impressions, attitudes, tendencies, traits, isiko hum sanskar kehate hain. And the third effect is you have put a force into motion which will come back to you at some point of time. Whether it's a positive action or negative action, you will get the effect of that action. At some point of time, at some point in space, it will come back to you. So these are the three effects of Karma. Yeh preliminary hai, yeh aapko jaana chahiye. Usually beyond the first effect, nobody goes. You, your performance is most important. What you do, what you show, you will get results accordingly. Not just that much. The other two also are going to work for you. So be careful, be alert. Kisi bhi ek karma mein yeh teeno effects hota hain. Then, after this we will go into why exactly are we working why do people work they want to do Karma Yoga. In India you will find many people who will say that whatever I am doing is Karma Yoga only but you know usually you are working because Rajas is an element in the human system that sort of pushes you you can't keep still for long it pushes you towards This is the only thing called Karma Yoga of changing the subject by objective means. So, this impulse of rajas in us can be converted into a yoga of changing the subject changing you through your work. So, this is the ideal of karma yoga and also there is an obligatory moral duty for you towards society, towards ah the people of the world, towards everyone on this earth because you have drawn so much from society. Do you acknowledge that? Aap thoda soch ke dekho today you are 18 or 20 or 24 whatever. So many years who has provided for you the homes you live in, the objects you use, the ideas that you think, they are all due to the labours of others. Aapne kya diya hai abhi tak? For a simple plate of food to come in front of you, do you know how many people have laboured? At least 15 people have laboured. So, please see this it is a it is mandatory, it is obligatory for you to contribute. You must do it it is not that we stand on a high pedestal and say no I have taken so much unconsciously in building my system, building this body and mind we have taken so much from this society, from this culture, from the world, from the labours of others, that I have to give back. I have to make my contribution. So it is nothing great to do Karma Yoga. Ye aapko karna hi hai. Dena hi hai. Jeevan hai hi dene ke liye. Agar this point if we are not able to digest, that the meaning of life is to be able to give fulfillment lies in being able to give then you have not grasped the spirit of Karma Yoga. Karma Yogis are happy in giving. They hesitate in taking. The more you take, the more you will see the mind contracts and the more you can give, the mind expands. Happiness just pours into that mind. So the natural impulse of a Karma Yogi is to give as much as possible. You see in today's world on this planet I think the population of this planet is 7.3 billion just now. In that one seventh the world is still reeling under impoverishment reeling under poverty there is so much to do in so many ways wherever you will be there is so much you can contribute and if this hobby of contributing doing good to others bringing benefit to others helping others if this doesn't become part of your life, there is no point in studying Karma Yoga This natural tendency should come in. Only this is going to go with me. The Karma that we do, that is your permanent account in a way. Your permanent credit in a way. Because that not only brings you success here, it builds your character. It takes care of the third effect of karma, it generates your destiny. So, be careful about karma at any given point of time, you should be able to say I am a contributor, I take pride in being able to contribute, I take pride in serving, I do not take so much joy in getting, but I take pride in serving, in giving. If you are able to give, you will always be happy. So, this is the spirit of karma yoga. Also try to understand that one grows into a civilized human being only through social participation and conscious participation, is not it? Because we live as a society, we live together, there is exchange at the physical level. You see the food you are eating is created by somebody. The ideas you are thinking is created by somebody, invented by somebody, isn't it? So you are using all of this, which means what? We are connected. So you must make your contribution. It is only obligatory, mandatory on your part to do this. This is the spirit of Karma Yoga. Another thing which people have all kinds of strange ideas. I am sure this group does not have it, but they feel that Karma toh bahut preliminary stage hai, hume toh yog chahiye. You know many people come and tell us this, but the Bhagavad Gita gives you the very simple, you can say solution, answer to this na karmana manarambhaat naishkarmiyam purushoshnute which means if you have not entered into work and exhausted yourself out with work you cannot reach the state of actionlessness It's not so easy The Yoga or Vedanta that we say it will come naturally if you are established in karma yoga to invoke your energies for social welfare, for the good of others. This is the very purpose of Karma Yoga. Now one more thing is you see when you enter your workspaces tomorrow, any company you enter any corporate, there will be CSR initiative. You know today multinational companies have billions of dollars they spend on CSR. Have you heard of CSR? Corporate Social Responsibility. Why do they do it? They do it because they have made a lot of profit. What is CSR? Social Responsibility. Everyone should feel this sense very intensely. At least 2% of the profit of every company has to go into maximizing social support systems. It has to go because you have taken from that society. What you are today is due to the labors of others. Vivekananda used to say this many times hungry your job is to feed him so you we have very powerful leaders in our culture who will point out to you the very purpose of Karma Yoga let me go a little into leadership now what are the qualities required for you to effectively do Karma Yoga so that the leadership in you flowers out. Who is a leader? Jo top position pe hai wo automatically leader hai. Who is a leader? Do you have any definitions of a leader? You see a leader is basically a visionary who sees something more than what others see. You understand? He sees something more than what others see and he is able to inspire the entire team by coordinating their wills together. This is the glory of a leader, he is able to make the whole team think like one one man. Ability to coordinate others wills and converge them towards purposeful action, towards the goal of that organization, towards the goal of that corporate, this is a leader. A leader is not just one who meets with the profit expectations, who raises his company's bottom lines that is secondary, a leader is mainly an inspiration. And to get the charisma of a leader, there are certain qualities required which you should develop in order to become a leader you understand performance is number one important no doubt but along with that these qualities which I am going to spell out one by one now this is even more important for you to shine like a leader because you know to be able to make other people follow you it depends entirely on the charisma of your personality if there is charisma of your personality . Personality may agar ye cheeze ho toh naturally you will be able to command leadership and if this is lacking then well it is a struggle a leader can face a enormous amount of struggle if these qualities are lacking. So, we will just go into these qualities you see effective leadership qualities means first thing is right understanding and decision making. This is the very heart of leadership. Right understanding ka matlab hai, clarity of vision. I told you a leader sees something more than what others can see and that comes through a clear mind. Hai na? Or by knowing too many things does it come. You must have be upgraded updated with all knowledge available, but clarity of thinking should be there most of all with clear understanding right understanding you will be able to take right decisions. So, this we will exhaustively study in another session, but here I am just mentioning to you the qualities of effective leadership. And the second most important quality is a strong will to translate decisions into action. Just knowing what is the right thing to do is not enough, you should be able to implement it execute it. And if you are able to do that, you will see the whole team will follow you. Many times we know what is the right thing to do but we are not able to do it. Isn't it? This is a common problem. In your own life you see, you know that getting up in the morning is a good thing. But can you get up? Are you able to do it? Many things we keep as goals. We want to achieve them sincerely. But we are not able to do why willpower lacking ah. So, now, we will see what are the qualities required in order to boost our will in order to bring into our life effective decision making. These are some of the qualities I have outlined here ah more more of this will be said later on, but here you just notice these qualities. You see honesty and integrity first of all. A leader is honest to the core. Eisenhower was the 34th president of United States. He is he once said integrity is unquestionably the foremost quality of a leader. He is 100 percent reliable, he believes in the core values of the organization of the nation, the core belief systems are part of his being, he will not step out an inch from there. So, S E sincerity, honesty, integrity, there is the possibility of you being a great leader. If you play with basic values, if you compromise with basic values you cannot be a leader. See this for yourself, if you know what your company expects from you and you well you take it lightly, you cannot be a leader in that company, you must be adamant about it. Ye hi baat hai, um honesty and integrity of purpose. This should be something very clear in your lives. And this is the very first quality of leadership. Next is confidence. A leader exudes confidence. Just pours forth confidence. Why? What does confidence come from? Who gives you confidence? Knowledge. Yes, and again your ability to think correctly. You see, if your knowledge is original, your mind is quite clear, you will always be confident. And if you lack confidence, you know nobody is going to follow you. It is the leader alone who instills confidence in others. If your entire team has to become effective and confident the leader should be it this does not mean over confidence, it means he is a he has so much faith in himself that he is able to throw out that faith on others. Vivekananda gave this definition of atheist and an atheist. He said an atheist today is one who has no faith in himself. Itna faith humko humare upar aana chahiye. Whether you believe in God or not it is a different thing. But if you don't believe in yourself, you are an atheist. Aap kuch nahi kar pao gaye. But if you don't believe in yourself, you are you are an atheist. So you must believe in yourself first. Then you believe in God. And if you have to believe in yourself, you must know yourself, you must be able to handle yourself well. You must be able to be clear about everything in your mind. If there are vague concepts and ideas, if you are compromising on values, you cannot be a leader, you can you can never be confident , you understand. So, this all this involves a certain amount of self knowledge, please see this . Then a leader who is unsure of himself never inspires anybody. So, the very third ah quality is inspiration through clarity. If you are unsure of what you are saying, what is the purpose of your ah what you want your team members to achieve, then you you cannot be a leader in any way . So, the the third is inspiration the the leader should personally have so much of this element in him . He must be so inspired, so confident that he is able to instill that inspiration to others . And remember this it is the example that you set which will be followed . A leader is an exemplar of the values he holds you understand. So, you see your subordinates are always watching you not just hearing you, they will keep watching you and if they see how you react to a particular situation in any kind of a situation if you are reacting with anger with hatred they are not going to admire you . So, up keep up a behavior up k reactions your general personality matters a lot in leadership . So, isco build through this course we are going to build you up does not matter what you see even your performance if a leader falters somewhere also if he is basically a man of very good character, very high integrity you know people will take that in their stride. Do you see this? Not that you will be successful in all enterprises somewhere you may falter in your performance, but if you are basically 100 percent, you will be successful anywhere So this is about EQ Your emotional quotient, spiritual quotient should be very high And you will be successful anywhere Next is empathy Empathy is another characteristic of a leader Empathy means Putting yourself in the shoes of others Feeling what that other person is feeling Not just standing apart and trying to think what that person might be feeling Actually feeling what that other person must be going through This is called empathy It is extreme sympathy Putting yourself into the shoes of others So unless you are able to put yourself into the shoes of your subordinates, you will not understand their problems, you will not be able to provide encouragement and support. So, empathy leader . So, this we will be studying what empathy means, it draws the whole team close, it is only empathy which will work for you. Finally, the the kindness you have showed, the understanding you have shown, this will bring the team together. So, ye ek cheez hai, then commitment and passion. What you want to achieve must be your number one commitment and passion. What you want the company to achieve should be the number one commitment, is not it? If you yourself are not passionate about it, can you inspire a group? So, see see this and when they actually see you getting your hands muddy, actually entering the work scenario and doing out working out things, they will put in their best. So, this commitment, this passion, this ability to get into the work situation 100 percent it is required to be a successful leader. So, you actually infuse new energy into them. The next is he must be ah communication skills he must have. Obviously, you know words can do unthinkable things, they can motivate a person to manifest great actions. So, you must be exactly able to communicate what you want to achieve, what you want the group to achieve. And through your communication skills you must be able to inspire them to achieve that. If you are not able to communicate effectively the goals before the team, you will not be an effective leader. So, communication skills are very important. For communication to become effective further on your head should be very clear, the goal should be clear to yourself first, isn't it? Ye shabdon ka jaal nahi hai communication. Please see this. A good talker is not necessarily a good leader. The the idea or the concept of what you are trying to achieve must be very clear in your head first which means what you have worked on it. Then you will be an effective communicator and that communication will help it will it it creates marvels actually. Every great leader has shown in some form this kind of a communications skills. Many great leaders do not even need too much of communication, do you know that? Just the personality will radiate what they want, what they know, what they have. Then accountability, obviously, you must be accountable for your actions, you must be perfectly 100 percent accountable for whatever the actions of the whole group, the whole team. A leader is one who takes a little more than his share of the blame and a little less than his share of the credit. He is an accountable person, isn't it? Agar jab credit hoth atavi then only that that I take and the blame all goes to the group then you cannot be a leader. Leadership itself means you are prepared to take the blame, even though you are not ah you are not the person to be blamed, you are prepared to take the blame of the entire team and give the credit to others. And this is connected with the next one also you see delegation empowerment. A leader is not expected to micromanage everything, but he is able to empower others to do it, he is able to delegate work with faith in them, with respect to them and with the conviction with the support they require the resources they require with the conviction that they will bring out their best. So, delegation be a you see in organizational skills you learn this at the very first point delegation and empowerment. Unless you empower people at all levels you will not have a great organization anywhere. If you shirk at empowering people, you will only have a disorganization. And delegation which means what? You are not expected to go and micromanage every team member. You are supposed to give them their duties and see that they are they are given the support the resource to do it well this is the job of a leader. So, this is another important thing make people take up responsibility and you will see they do it very well you get the idea a leader is able to a leader is able to inspire that sense of responsibility in others. You know basically what happens in leadership? The leader's will is so well developed and dominant that all wills become subservient and obedient to him. This is what happens basically because he has developed himself in such a way naturally he is able to motivate others towards a particular goal this naturally happens. So, if you want to be a leader first of all you must reach that level of motivation, that level of dedication, that level of realization of whatever goal you want to achieve and then that sharp developed mind which is bubbling with this energy of a of gaining the goal that will be able to transmit that inspiration to others. So, basically this is what leadership means Vivekananda used to say a leader is born a leader cannot be made all this that we are discussing basically it has to do with mental faculties. Please see this. Aise sanskaar hone chahiye ki naturally you are able to exude all this very high effective qualities. Then finally is creativity and innovation. Once Steve Jobs was asked this that what's the difference between a leader and a follower and he said you know the difference is this a what is the difference between a leader and a follower and he said you know the difference is this a leader is an innovator. Originally he can contribute, a follower cannot contribute originally creativity has not developed. A leader is able to as I told you see all sides together, he is a visionary in a sense and that is why try to develop this these are especially a right brain ability which means what out of the box thinking you are able to find solutions in such a way it is a completely original. In in whatever you take up if you have developed this faculty this is a real gift I tell you if you have developed this faculty you will shine anywhere. So, basically he is a researcher, he is an innovator, he contributes ah originally to any area. So, if all these qualities are put together you will get a really effective leader. Now, let me tell you I will ah tell you a small story to show you the importance of Karma Yoga. We have another 10 minutes. Just listen to this story. This story is trying to tell you why it is important to know the principles of Karma Yoga. This is just an introductory class for you. We will go into detail about many of these topics in the next few classes. This story is just telling you actually what is important in life or whatever you say how to overcome our difficult difficulties. What is actually needed to overcome this life? This story is pointing out towards that. This story was told by Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa. Aapne suna hoga. He was a great saint. Sri Ramakrishna story this is. It so happened that there was a village and in that village there was a river running across the village and many times the villagers had to cross that river to go to the other side of the village to sell whatever their vegetables or milk. So every morning they used to go to the other side of the village to sell whatever their vegetables or milk. So, every morning they used to go on the boat, the boat would be full of these villages, they would go to the other bank after sometime they would come back. So, one morning all of them gathered and they saw in the boat a Panditji was sitting. In those days you see long time back, the Panditji was the only educated man in the village, all the others were simple village folk. In those days you see long time back the Panditji was the only educated man in the village. All the others were simple village folk. Zyada kuch nahi aata tha unko. So they sought the Panditji and at once bowed down to him and then Panditji said haan betho then all of them sat in the boat and then they now their purpose is to go to the other bank of the river to sell milk and vegetables and all that. So as the boat started moving across the river, it was a wide river, so it started moving and then the Panditji started showing his knowledge. He said, Aap logon ko sankhya aata hai? Sankhya philosophy? They said, nahi Panditji. Toh yoga ka kuch aata hoga? Do you know yoga? No, no, we. So, do you know anything about Yoga? Do you know Yoga? No, no. We don't know Yoga either. So, do you know anything about Vedanta? No, we don't know Vedanta either. You people don't know anything. You don't know the purpose of life. You never read it, never thought about it. He went on like this for a long time. Now, it so happened that when they were in the middle of the river, a storm started brewing and the waves started rolling, the boat started swinging and everybody got frightened and there was lightning and thunder and the storm increased and everyone got frightened that the boat will capsize and that is what happened you know the boat started shaking very heavily and then one of the villagers asked Panditji, Panditji do you know how to swim? Do you know swimming? And Panditji said, No I don't know that. Then he said you know Sankhya, Vedanta, Yoga, everything but you don't know how to swim. You will drown. And that is what happened. The boat capsized. It turned over and all the villagers swam and went. But the Panditji drowned. If you do not know how to work properly, you will drown in the sea of life. Even if you know everything else. This is the thing. Even if you know everything else If you know how to work properly You will use your karma, your profession, your career, your family, your relationships, everything In order to reach a very elevated goal of life Otherwise you can make a mess out of life Karma can be used to bind one or to free one. The same action. So the ideal of Karma Yoga is to so use karma, to so use your action that it frees you. That it brings great good to you and to others. This is the art of effective action. Now let me go a little bit into the theory of Karma. Thoda philosophy bhi padna hai is class mein. Okay, whether you like it or not, I know you are all science people, but thoda philosophy touch you must have because you know, philosophy and science are not two different things. They all, both of them arise from the same type of mind. A thinking mind, a mind which is clear enough to understand the connection between things. Operational principle of karma is causation. Causation theory, I just mentioned it previously. This is the universal law of karma. This law is very simple, I will tell you. You see it's very interesting also. What does this law say? Every effectoses a cause and the effect is not different from the cause. It is dependent on the cause. And if you want to remove the effect, you have to remove the cause. It's so simple, this theory. So now this on this theory is based entire Karma Yoga. The laws of Karma are based on this theory. What is the meaning of this? Whatever situation you are finding yourself in today, it is set into motion by what you have done in the past. Because every effect means there is a cause to it. And what you are going to do today is going to decide your future and you put your mind apply your mind to the things they it should be applied to you will be very successful in the future. So, cause and effect are always in relationship this is what is called law actually the relationship between a cause and an effect a particular cause and a particular effect is what we call law So the law of causation connects the cause and the effect Now does that mean that I have whatever forces have created my present I have no hold over them? Can we change karma? Basically Can we change or no? It is all fixed. Many people say this you know Whatever is written here is fixed. We can't do anything. Only lazy people say this. You can change karma anytime through your will. This is the great glory of human life that you have been given the freedom of choice, the freedom of will, the freedom of intention and the freedom of identification also. Whether you choose to identify with the body or not at any given point of time it is your choice, whether you choose to identify with the mind, intellect or any other object is your choice. You have been given all this freedom using this what karma you produce that will that is going to decide your destiny is come up basically you are in charge of your life you are in charge of your future it is not that it is all prefixed predestined and I cannot make changes through your will through your decisions through your right intentions you can change anything in your life so karma is not an absolute law it's a relative law Vivekananda he always used to say you are the creators of your destiny you create your destiny through your karma. And he he also used to say you are what your thoughts have made you. So, take care of what you think thought is mental karma is not it. There is a physical karma and there is a mental karma. You take a medicine and go to sleep or you divert your attention to something good is not it. or you divert your attention to something good isn't it, maybe you went and saw a very good movie, you do something else to take your mind away from the pain. So, now, you see I can choose to sit and lament the whole night I have a headache, I have a headache, I have a headache or I can take a a preventive, a curative or I can divert my attention to other things. Now the choice is mine what I do. So this is the point anything any experience you have the power to change how you are going to feel that experience. You have that power Don't say that this is my karma. now the headache is my karma if I say and I don't do anything about it, I am only going to suffer for it isn't it, I have in me the power to divert my attention to something else, to remedy the pain, I have in me all these powers, if I don't use them and say oh yeh mera karma hai, kya kare, mera karma isliye itna dard hai, if I go on saying this, is there any meaning? That is why we are telling you, your karma is not an absolute law, it is in your hands. Recently, you know, in our school here, I had a marvelous experience with a very small boy, 5 year old, his name is Umar. So, I was giving him a punishment one day. He is a very nice child who is constantly laughing, laughing and giggling and always happy and energetic like this. So, he did some mischief and I was giving him a punishment. Maine kaha, kaan pakdo. So, he caught his ears and then he started giggling because it was tickling him. And then, maine kaha not the way to take punishment. Don't laugh. Then somehow he stood still and then I said, come on, do it. And then he started doing it, but it was all fun and play for him. He started falling and laughing and like early morning, it's like an exercise for him. So I thought, you see, even a punishment can be taken like this. And he made all the teachers laugh. Everybody laughed and everyone was happy because he was so happy he was not punished for that so you see your attitude can change a punishment into something else all of us laughed at him all of us felt happy with his attitude so this is the point now he could have got very angry or sorrowful or blamed for having got a punishment early in the morning nothing of this he did so yeah they can have a carma a joy a who are a kole a kishati naya any negative thing coming into your life don't allow your intelligence to desert you at that moment this is handling this is real Karma Yoga practical Karma Yoga, us samay mein aapki poori energy aise chalni chahiye that you are able to happily overcome that problem a problem is nothing but something pointing you towards well you should move this way not that way that is the meaning of a problem so usko aise hi lena hai with a cheerful face and heart you must face it and find the right solution to it without going into depression without lamenting without going into any negativity so this choice is entirely in your hands isn't it now no one has taught Umar to take such punishments but his nature was such his nature is so joyful for him everything is fun so anything can be taken in this way that is why I say if something can be changed, it's not absolute, it's a relative law, karma isliye don't blame your karma at least you people should never do it ki yeh mera karma hai, ab aisa hi hoga no, you have the ability to stand up and change the situation and actually sankhya will tell you, ab zyada samay nahi hai but I will just show you one slide which will show you how exactly your mind works how exactly what is the energy flowing in you which is making this entire system function isliye bhagavad gita mein baar baar reference karte hain prakriti is doing all the work through your instrumentation you are exactly not working do you believe in this that you are exactly not working do you believe in this? that you are not working see it from your physiological activity are you in charge? now if I say, well are you permitting your heart to beat? it is beating by itself whether you permit or not it will beat your blood flow, is it asking your permission? it is flowing by itself now who is doing all this permission? It is flowing by itself Who is doing all this? It is vital energy flowing within you which is a part of Prakriti Are you getting it? So Bhagavad Gita always says this If you read the shlokas you will know Prakriti is doing all the work You make yourself a fit instrument to direct that energy to positive ways. That is all. But all work is always done by Prakriti. You see this slide will show you. Prakriti, its evolutes are your buddhi, ahankar, mind, the subtle elements, the senses, the motor organs, the gross elements all these are the parts of nature where does all this come in between you? try to figure it out where are you in all of this? you are working through all this but the energy which is doing all the work is the energy of nature this is basic psychology. So, only thing which is ah you can say which you can manipulate is your will not the energy flowing through you. You understand through your will you can use all of this to perform specific work to go in a specific direction, but the energy itself you are not creating isn't it. This is the basic law of energy energy is neither created nor destroyed law of conservation of energy. It is always going on it is passing through your system is equal to prakriti kerai cosmic energy and you only have the ability to handle which way that energy will go through your will, how it will be used, for what purpose it will be used. So, this much responsibility you have, you understand, but you do not create energy. So, actually you do not create work, you that is why in the Gita they will tell you, Prakriti vachakarmani kriyamanani sarvasahah ahankara vimudhatma kartahamiti manyate Prakriti is doing all the work and ahankari will say I am doing it. The energy is not yours. You understand? Energy is flowing through your system through your will direct that energy to do good work. This is the purpose of human life. If this much you understand, you will understand the spirit of Karma Yoga, the ideal of Karma Yoga. This idea is important for you because later also you will get this idea. That's why try to understand this. I am not generating the energy in my system, isn't it? Energy is already there. I only have to learn to direct it properly. That's my job. So this is the art of Karma Yoga. We will stop here time is up I think there is some announcement to be made.
 Music Today we are going to study Karma and Mind Management and we are also going to study the types of Karma, effects of Karma and how to get out of this Karma Chakra, Karma Bandhan Jo Kehte Hai. So we will be studying all these points. Last time after the last session, one student asked me about how to meet deadlines, time management basically and I think you asked the question. So, the thing is you see his question was as a PhD student you have to meet deadlines on a regular basis and sometimes we can't meet them why although we try we can't do it so it's a it's a problem in time management but you know at the heart of all these whether you call it time management or stress management or anger management it is all about their different facets of mind management. You may find this a little strange. How are they related to mind management? Because just for instance take your experience of time. You know there is a something called a linear flow of time and a psychological time. Psychological time alone you experience, you experience time as your mind records it and you know what that experience is based upon, it is based upon the movement of your thought. See this is the wonderful thing about time. Psychological time is the only kind of time you experience and that depends on the movement of your thought if your thought is say very erratic uncontrolled then you know your sense of time it just stretches out if you are very concentrated time gets compressed as it will. Have you seen this phenomenon if you are absorbed deeply in something say in a math problem, even 4-5 hours might pass and you do not realize it. What has happened to time? Same time has flown, but time just flew for you. And if you are not absorbed in something, some maybe some class is very boring, you are not getting absorbed in anything, then time hangs heavy on you, same time. But why does this happen? Time depends on the movement of your thought, rather the recording of time depends on the equipment the mind which is characterized by thought. So, the nature and quality of your thought decides your experience of time. So also with the other things and that is why we in general will study mind management in order to learn about stress management, time management, anger management all these managements. Ah because if you can manage your mind and the thought process you can manage all of this. Do you understand this phenomenon? It is happening every day in our lives. See when you go home over the weekend now, though then will it will be like 2 minutes for you and sometimes when you are in a place where you have to put in a lot of labor you do not like that much that time time just hangs heavy on you. So, on an everyday basis we are experiencing this these kind of phenomena which which means very simply the instrument which is recording time space and causation is the instrument which influences your experience of time space and causation you see it's a it's a subtle point so if you are able to handle that Do you every day? Every day do you stop thought at any time? Which means your experience of time. It happens in deep sleep, isn't it? No thoughts, no time. When you get up in the morning, you don't know whether you slept 4 hours or 5 hours or 6 hours. No sense of time because no movement of thought. What does this mean? The same thing which I am telling you. Your experience of time, which is psychological time, is entirely dependent upon the movement of your thoughts. The thought process. And if you get that under control, your experience of time will change so this is what we see, you see this is what yoga tries to do for you why it is said, practice 5 minutes of yoga everyday so that you are better able to handle your thought process if periodically you stop it, a bit, at least a few fractions of a second, you stay apart from your thought, you are just seeing what is happening in the mind, you get a certain hold over your mind, you get a certain hold over your experience of life which includes time. So, this is the great thing about yoga you know you you take the whole experience into your hands. If you actually stall time, you stall the mind, the thought process, you stop time. So, there are small methods you see at the end of this course, the last session I will give you ah a small meditation technique which will be very useful to you, how exactly to handle the mind to better our experience of life, but today this much you should understand mind management is directly related to managing everything else in your life. And that is why you must get a hold over mind management ah intense levels of concentration keeping the will in one direction not constantly changing directions and bringing in so much of enthusiasm and energy at the task at hand, all this ensures your success in life, is not it? More than how much you are exposed to what you are taking in, more than all of that, how you handle this equipment is very important for the acquisition of knowledge for success in life. And that is how we will be studying mind management here. If your own mind is restless, you know what happens? Do not think you become very dynamic. Restless people are not dynamic people. They are just wasting their energy because they cannot control the thought process at all. Restlessness is not dynamicity. So, if the mind is calm, collected and directed in one direction, going in one direction, then you can generate enormous levels of energy. If it is calm, collected, composed Vivekananda used to always say this knowledge depends upon calmness of the mind. So, we will try to see how you are able to generate these states and in a way ah actually you see the very definition of dynamicity is ah intensity of consciously directed energy being dynamic means being this . So, so much of an up a laser . What is a laser? Laser beam? It is intense concentration of photons, is not it? You can do so much work with it and you can even actually slice very delicate tissue, you can do very sensitive work with it. So also is your are your mental faculties. If they are sharpened, honed, in one direction, concentrated, then you can do enormous work, marvelous work with it. So, that is why mind management is very important for success in life. Success is not just like that. A certain amount of your contribution from your side, the subjective side is required to ensure success just changing outside things doesn't get you this success now let me tell you this there are four faculties of the mind for those of you who have attended the last course I showed you those four faculties on a slide what are they can you tell me Manas, Buddhi, Chitta, Ah ahankar These are the four faculties of the mind What is the meaning of manas? It is that part of your mind which is cogitating Sankalpa, vikalpa, atmika, antah, karana, vritti ko manas kehte hain Which is always thinking the pros and cons of things, changing Thinking mind is Manas. Okay this is just one part of your mind one functional aspect of your mind you can say and the next one is Budhi Nishchayatmika Antahkaranavrithi which means the determinative faculty of your mind which decides upon something. When the entire Antahkaran decides determines something it will not budge from that point then it has become buddhi. You see the same mind how it modifies itself into different faculties for different functions and then you have ahamatmika antahkaranavri, the ahankar, the I sense in you, ya jo unconsciously in a deep way, a sense of I, individuality is rising within you, the I sense, isko hum ek roop deta hai, ego we call it. And many times we are identified with that ego without realizing what it means, without understanding what it represents. But anyway, this vritti also is there ahamatmika antahkarna vritti which is called ahankar and then the fourth is anusandhanatmika antahkarna vritti you have a huge memory bank within you the conscious thoughts which you have thought in the past all of this together where where are they they are in your memory whenever you require them or it is required for any particular situation they just pop from your subconscious and unconscious minds isn't it ah that is your memory chittam. So these are different aspects of your mind now I told you stress management time management all this depends upon mind management if I can't handle these four faculties to my benefit if thought process is just going on I am not in charge thoughts are happening or well am I thinking or thoughts are happening thoughts are usually happening going on I, well, I am not in charge. I am just seeing what is happening. When it becomes terrible, then I feel, I should do something about it. So Yoga means this entire thought process, you are able to bring it, you first survey it, bring it into your hands, so that you are thinking the thoughts you want to think. You see what a marvellous state this must be. You are only aware. And you bring in that thought which you want, which is useful to you. Again, when you don't want it, it just moves out of your mind. You bring in other thoughts. So that directed thinking you have. Committed, purposeful living you will have. Otherwise you just keep on happening. You don't know what is happening. So you see, Yoga is such a method which puts you in charge of your life. This is a possibility if you work on these faculties of your mind. See this cogitating aspect which I told you if you bring clarity to your thought process you see your manas will start functioning in a particular way the way this unnecessary anxieties fears emotional insecurities sitting and brooding over something gossip all this will go out of your life because my thought process, I have no time to waste on all this whatever thoughts and thoughts are going on in your mind that is purposeful, goal oriented I have no time to waste on this kind of things this will come naturally, this seriousness will come into your life Todasa you must pay attention to your thought process I'm telling you conscious thought process that itself goes and becomes your memory that itself goes into the subconscious it becomes your memory so once your manas starts functioning you know in a very conscious way you become more alert and alive awake as it were. Vivekananda always used to say What did he used to say? Arise awake. And stop not till the goal is reached. So you must become alive to the depths of your being. This is what we call a human being. One who has awakened to the depths of his being One who has awakened to the depths of his being That is a human being. Human being. Otherwise you are half like sleepwalking you know not at all aware not at all conscious of what is happening just drifting through life so then life will take you anywhere so understand each of these faculties you can bring it into your hand the this second one which I said was after manas buddhi the determinative faculty this should absolutely be in your hand isn't it when you want to apply your mind you should be able to apply suppose something is not good for you not useful to you you must be able to turn your mind away from it now you have no hand in the matter it's not like that the buddhi should be so fine refined and committed it stays on what you want to achieve and then you have this ahankar is part or a satva Gnan on this. Because you must understand what the I means. Have you thought about it any time? Seriously? The I which you are trying to build up. Which is very important. It's the functional entity in this world. The interactional entity in this world. What is it about? What does it signify? What is the permanent aspect of it yeah fear the changing things only I am calling I you see you were a baby you were an infant then you became a young person your your body is constantly changing your mind is changing all the time so what is the I? Is there a permanency about it? This is this naturally should come to us so understanding the ego sense in depth it is part of the learning process don't think it is some special yoga vedanta which we are telling you it is part of learning process because if your eye reflects on itself, you will become a very mature adult. You understand? It is not just messed up or you can say entangled with unnecessary things. If your eye is entangled with unnecessary identities, you know, when peer pressurea hai you may just identify with the thought currents of your friend whether they are good or not so your identity is invested in your affection to your friend so a SA identities they may not be useful to you or that day as he said your eye you are identified with some celebrity your your sense of identity your sense of identity will be very clear, very firm only if it has reflected upon itself. Please see this. There should be a little bit of original knowledge about this. No one can teach you. Why can't they teach you? You should understand what your identity is. Can anybody tell you who you are? Can I tell you who you are? Can I tell you who you are? So this entire research is personal and original. You must first of all doubt this sense of I. Try to see what is the permanent thing about it and dive a little inside. See what is the permanent aspect of you. What is unchanging through all experiences and you will naturally step into Vedanta. Vedanta is the root the source of it it is tracking. So I will not go into this Vedanta just now but towards the end of this talk we will go a little into it what I am trying to tell you is all of these different faculties are available to you at any given point of time. This is the key to mind management. Look at the last faculty, what we call Chittam, that is your memory bank. All your conscious experiences have gone into the subconscious, unconscious and become your memories. And they pop up anytime. And you suddenly feel, ye chinta kaha se aayi? This thought came from where? At once upon a time it was your conscious thought. You put it in, into your subconscious. Now it's popping up again. So most of your thoughts are like that, they are memories. Please check and see just now they are coming from what you have fed previously through the conscious mind. Conscious mind works like a gate, what you put in will go in, what you stop will stop. If you allow something to go in it will go and settle in the subconscious, after sometime it will come out as memory So this your memory bank is another huge aspect of you And you are interpreting life's experiences through these faculties So you should have a hold on these This is what yoga does See the very first shloka, sutra of yoga You must have heard of Patanjali Yoga Sutra suna hoga aapne? What is the very first Sutra say? Yoga sthu chitta vritti nirodh. Very good. It is stopping the vrittis of the mind, stopping thought. Why should you stop thought? Why should you? Because if I am identified with the thought process, what will happen? It will just carry me away. If just suppose you are angry, if you are totally identified with your anger, your anger will blow you away first and then the person in front of you also. But if you are a little distant from that anger, you are seeing it. Mere mann mein jo ho raha hai, wo mein dekh pa rahi hoon. If this is your experience, neither will you get blown away by your anger nor the person in front of you. In fact, anger will not manifest. Samajh mein aara hai? Why you have created a distance between you and the thought process. Yeh sambhav hai na? Yeh hota hai na? created a distance between you and the thought process . You see in any situation if you are identified with that particular emotion that particular thought then you are under the spell of that thought. If you refuse to be identified with it if you are seeing it as you see anything else as you are seeing the screen if you are if you are a little distant from it then you can control it you can control its effects so that is why yogas tu chitta vritti nirod stop thought for some time see the thought process as a witness yehi bol rahe hain us sutra mein you are always the witness. By mistake, occasionally you get identified. This is the truth about your mind. Always be the witness. Be the witness of your mind's activities. But because this training is not given to you, training in yoga, you quickly go and identify with many things. And then your intelligence works to protect that identity your intellect goes and tries to protect that identity so what happens is you are protecting something, defending something which you are not sure of Yoga will clear all this, this entire realm of action taking place in your mind all this is part of Karma Yoga hai. Aap sochhe mat yeh kuchh aur yoga hai. Because until you transcend mind, everything you are doing is karma. Even the thought process. Until samadhi is reached, everything is karma. Subtler and subtler karma you can say. More and more refined karma. So yog is in the the preliminary of yoga is it is teaching you how to remain distant from the thought process so that you are able to control it so that you take charge over it once you take charge over it anger management it will become natural to you you know anger is arising you know you have to control it in this situation. Immediately you will not talk something, you will not get angry and ferocious. Stress koi problem hoga kya? You know you are getting stressful, you will learn to relax naturally. You will know how to manage your time naturally. If you have control over mind, everything else follows. If you have no control over the mind, things will drive you. This word drive is a big word in psychology. You are actually driven. Then you will say that I am not able to do this, I am not able to concentrate, I am not able to manage time. So, go to the counsellor. So, get a little hold over yourself. You will see how magically your life will change. Intelligence means becoming more and more aware hm and being able to control this equipment well, that is real intelligence. So, this is what ah you be understand by time management ah and mind management. There are ways to do this and one of the best ways to do this is on an everyday basis applying your mind to a little yoga. Yeh bahot bada karma hai. Just like how you do any other work, 5 minutes a day, morning hours you can apply to yoga. So, the technique will be taught to you once you get a hold over this you know any work you generate will have the stamp of a calm mind which means complete clarity will be there if this is not there clarity neither either in your work or your speech or your thought process if there is no clarity what does that mean? There is only confusion. Aapne micro-managers dekhe hain workplace mein. There are some people who are micro-management experts which means they want to control every single thing about any action, about any project and they create all problems due to that. They will never delegate work completely to if a boss is a micromanager you are in for a terrible situation because what he will do is he will he wants everything to go by him he cannot delegate responsibility he will want to fix everything. Suppose you have to do a project paper he will decide the font size and the kind of design where he will not allow you to do anything. Everything has to go by him and in his method the know how is entirely his and he will enforce actions upon you. So, what does all this do? It actually snubs your creativity and you are not able to participate in anything. So, micromanagement has its place to perfect a job you must be able to manage the very details of it, but you cannot impose those details on others. So, when you are a leader if you are a micromanager it creates a a kind of negative situation in the workplace. If you are not able to control your mind many times you become a micromanager because the mind is so restless the person will constantly want to they will keep it is called checking in to their employees. They want to check into everything and they will direct every job that is to be done at the workplace and everything has to run by them it is to be done at the workplace and everything has to run by them it has to be done the right way they cannot motivate people they are indecisive . So, yes sub problems queue indecision is one another example you can take for it is the result of bad mind management the the Nisha atmika antah karna vritti is not fixed at all. So, you are indecisive. So, how will you lead a group if you are like this? This is the difference between good leaders and bad leaders. You see a good leader is basically very composed, sure of himself, completely confident. Why? Thought process is so clear. Plans are so clear in the mind, project is so clear, he knows how to have it done and this clarity is not there in a bad leader, in a mere micromanager and that is why that creates a vast difference. If mind management has become a habit with you, you will be calm, composed, collected at any given moment of time. So, it will show in your work and that naturally leads to leadership qualities. Look at these differences which I have put here between good leaders and bad leaders. These are key differences. Good leaders will concentrate on results, bad leaders will worry about status, good leaders will hold people accountable, bad leaders are well they themselves are not accountable. So, they just want to be popular or want to be well accepted the entire striving is for that. Good leaders will strive to be clear, they know that is the key to success, clarity of your thought process. Bad leaders have a need to be right. Good leaders will encourage dialogue, bad leaders will prevent dialogue. Why? Your dialogue, your speech shows the clarity, isn't it? Then good leaders engender trust, but bad leaders would not do that, they are not vulnerable. So, you see there is a marked difference between the two ways of working. If you have brought your mind under control, naturally you will generate very high leadership qualities and without that you are working at something which somehow you are managing it. So a leader of a group cannot manage like that. Aapko leadership skills sikhne hai, you must first work out on yourself. The entire process of yoga, it is changing the subjective mechanism in order to achieve great objective results. Isn't it? So a little work on that is required. You see the fundamentals of core leadership skills for every career, this is something you must know. First thing is self-awareness that is why. Look at the slide, understand your strengths and weaknesses, identify gaps in your skills, you must be well acquainted with yourself. Then you will know how to handle any situation. Self-awareness is the very first thing. Have you ever seen a restless leader or a leader who is completely off balance, then you do not call him a leader, he may just be a boss, screaming and shouting and trying to boss over others. Self-awareness, calmness, this is the first thing. Then communication skills, you are clear about everything. You see, write clearly, speak with clarity and always use active listening behaviours. Listening also is part of communication, do you know that? Do you listen properly? Abhi abhi dekho, sun rahe ho ya aur kahi hai mann? Ability to listen is a great art. Abhi abhi dekho, sun rahe ho ya aur kahi hai mann? Ability to listen is a great art. Listening means absorbing. If you listen with complete concentration, you are actually taking the thing in, soaking it in. So, develop this art. It's a way of learning. And then influence communication, communicate your vision, align the efforts of others and build commitment at all levels. All this is very good, but remember your in influence finally, the influence you assert on others is due to your well developed personality. Agar he is lacking core no matter how much you try, you do, you don't know what kind of influence you are casting The very sight of you should bring that reliability in people If you become such a personality, you will be a natural leader anywhere Then learning agility, you know great leaders are always learners You read their lives, the lives of all these great people whom we have been discussing, they were everyday basis they were learning. Because the mind has been kept free to grow, it has not got enmeshed in unnecessary things. So, learning is constant with them. Be in a learning mode, value and seek out the lessons of experience when needed. They are on an everyday basis learning. We alone can be a great teacher who can be a great student. Please know this. You must be able to give your mind that scope to be in constantly in the learning mode. So all these are fundamental characteristics of leadership which you should know it is entirely dependent upon mind management, all of these are mental faculties, isn't it? self awareness, communication skills, influence you assert, learning agility it's all to do with your mind he is also saying that mind management is the one essential thing to shine in life. If you ignore this, you are just adjusting the outside, adjusting your employees, your colleagues, your workplace, that alone is not enough. So this is the basic thing which you have to know in developing leadership skills. Now, after this let us go into the types of karma that we are capable of. I am not going to talk about career options, you can go to any website and learn about that that is not what I am going to talk about here, but you must know from this personality, from the subjective end, what is the kind of karma you can create. First of all is physical karma, yes. Then I told you mental karma, even mental processes, thought processes are also karma. Through your will, you generate karma. Through any of your faculties, mental faculties, you can generate karma. And so, there are, you faculties, you can generate karma. And so there are, you can say different types of karma. Like for example, you might have heard, ye sab shabd hai Hindi mein, ann daan hai. Jab aap kuch karte ho in the form of giving food, you call it ann daan. Then there is vidya daan. Hai na? You see, it is good to feed a child food, but it is better to help him learn something so that he earns his own food, isn't it. So Vidyadhan is there, then there is Gnanadhan which means you are able to give a level of knowledge by which you solve the existential problems of life. So by which a person gets the ability to do whatever he wants to do. This training is Jnan. So like this different forms of contribution, different forms of Karma can be done. The genius, the important thing about Karma is a real genius of a Yogi will convert anything that comes into his ambit into Yoga It means that whatever comes into your life You see whether you are an engineer, whether you are a manager Whether you are, just now you are a student Anything that comes into your life, you must have the intelligence to convert it into Yoga We have to do it in such a way that our mind is able to remain at a particular level due to that. It is able to enhance us. It is able to elevate us. If you are able to do that, then you are a real genius, I would say. Because this is the nature of a Yogi. Anything that comes into his life, he is able to convert it to Yoga. That is why it is not about what type of work we do. Any work coming into your life can be used to enhance your life There are many beautiful stories in our culture I will just tell you one which Vivekananda says in his Karma Yoga lectures Just pay attention to this story because it has great lessons to teach us What do we mean when we say any work can be done as a Yoga? Yoga means, till now what did you understand? To go and sit in a mountain cave or to sit at least in a shrine. That is Yoga. Now you must change your thinking. There is office Yoga, there is laboratory Yoga, there is yog at the sports field, ye sabhi yog hai. If you are doing it with a particular state of mind, with a particular attitude, any of this can become yog. How? You see the the story is like this, ah, the there is a young yogi, a sanyasin who did a lot of austerity in a forest and as a result of his austerity, he he developed some yogic powers. So kya hua, wo ek din bethe the ek ped ke niche and some dry leaves fell on his head and with certain amount of anger, he looked up and he saw a crow and a crane fighting there on the tree. And because of the anger in his mind, it generated a certain amount of heat and it burnt up the two birds and they fell down. Now the yogi was very happy and proud and in fact overjoyed, ki aisi meri shakti ab ho gayi hai, ki I can do all this, this is a kind of yogic power, so I have grown that much in yoga. So with this pride, then he came out, he went out for begging, wahi ek village tha, wahan par gaye wo, and he called out at the first house, mother give me something, and then a voice came from inside that house, please wait my son, I will come in a few minutes. Now when he was waiting there, he suddenly thought what this woman is making me wait, I am such a great yogi, I burnt up those two birds with just my sight and she is making me wait like this, she does not know how great I am, this thought came into his mind. And he kept waiting after sometime the lady came out and she said, look my son I had my duties to do, my husband was sick, I was serving him, don't think I am that crow and crane, you can't burn me down like that. And then the yogi was very surprised, ki inko kaise pata chala, how did she come to know that I did that. Then he asked her, mother but how did you come to know? And then she said, see my son, I have not practiced your kind of yoga, austerities in the forest, postures and meditation. I have not practiced that. I have just been very sincere to my duties as a housewife. I have been very sincere before I was married. I served my parents with all my heart. After I got married, I served this household with all my heart. Just now my husband is sick. I was serving him. This sincerity and service, this karma alone has brought me the fruit of knowledge. I am able to know what is going on in every mind. And then this Yogi was very surprised. What kind of knowledge is this? Is it possible to do it just by doing Karma? And this ordinary Karma? So he told her, tell me more about this. And then she said, you see there is one person in such and such a market. You go and meet him. And he will tell you more about this Karma Yoga. So the sanyasi goes there and he sees that person whom she had indicated, he is sitting there. He is a Vyad. Do you know Vyad? A hunter, a butcher actually. He is sitting and cutting meat. This story comes in the Mahabharata. Theread Gita is a section, it is very beautiful so there this story comes, a butcher teaches this sanyasin as soon as the sanyasi sees the butcher he feels what am I going to learn from him? this person is like such a demon and sitting and cutting meat what can I learn from him? but this Vyad, as soon as the yogi goes there he says come come did she send you then he says how did you come to know then he said well we come to know through our duty we come to know through our everyday work that itself has generated so much of clarity in our mind I come to know of everything please sit down and then he explained to him the whole of Karma Yoga. Sirf Karma se how you can reach the highest Siddhis. Do your duty to perfection with detachment with complete commitment and sincerity it will take you to the highest. Yehi hai Vyad Gita. And what is renunciation? It doesn't mean running away from home. It only means you are not working for the ego. You don't have to run away from anything. If the will again is detached from the ego, that is renunciation. All these simple lessons you will learn. Your everyday work can take you to a very high level. You should understand the way to do it. This is Karma Yoga. Swakarmana tam abhyarsha siddhim vindati manavah. Bhagavad Gita says. Swakarmana, with your everyday duty, you can worship the Almighty. Pooja does not mean just going to a temple and offering something. With your everyday work, what you are doing in your lab, what you are doing on your laptop, with that you can worship the Lord. In fact, that is the worship of the immanent Lord. If you read Vedas, Vedanta, two aspects of God are given. One is the transcendental aspect that God, maybe you have defied him in a deity in the temple and you think that worship alone is worship but he is actually distributed entirely in his creation The consciousness in each one of you which is shining in your eyes that is the immanent aspect of God When you serve another person, you are actually worshipping the God in him. This is what philosophy becomes. When you serve another person, what are you actually doing? You are worshipping the God in him. So please see this. Karma Yoga is such a path just by work done in a particular dedicated spirit it can take you to the very highest in human life so this is not a stepping stone to the other yogs although many times it is interpreted like that if it is done with the right attitude instantly it will take you to the highest like you see in this story is a common housewife a butcher talking of the highest knowledge. Hamare mission me I do not know if you know ah very many activities take place and there are schools for slum children, poor children, there are hospitals for poor people and you know in all these hospitals and everything actually the the rogues the the people who are who have the disease they are worshipped like God the the seva itself is worship and one of the stalwarts of this order Raja Maharaj he used to say that Turiyanandji Maharaj has said this that in three days if you do perfect nishkam karma it will bring you the realization of God if three days you can worship perfectly through Karma Yoga, it will get you the highest knowledge so you see this karma is a very powerful path even if your aim is not the highest spiritual knowledge whatever you want to attain in this life it is possible if your Karma ki shakti aapke piche ho, if you are doing work anyhow with a mindset which is not committed with the mind completely out of control then fulfillment is not success is not possible anywhere please see this so so many such things are there Vivekankananda says in one place, it is not the receiver who is blessed but the giver. You get the point? Be thankful that you are allowed to exercise your power of benevolence and mercy in this world and thus become pure and perfect. In fact, the very purpose of work is this. It changes you. If it is done with the attitude of a Karma Yogi, it is going to change you. Vivekananda used to say that this world is a moral gymnasium where we come to take exercise and become stronger spiritually. Stronger and stronger. I remember when in Bangalore centre, we have a slum school. Aur us slum school mein jo bachche aate hain unke liye hum kuch provide karte hain. Either breakfast or brunch, something like this. So that many times they are not able to have breakfast and come. So we usually used to put a list and donors, that is devotees who used to come they would fill up on this particular day I will provide for breakfast, I will provide brunch or something whatever fruit milk. So, they would put it down ah usually we expected that next week's thing would be filled up, but you know usually one months entire ah thing was filled up which means everybody wanted to contribute there was not a single day when we had to ask whatever it is the amount was four thousand five thousand for that particular day's breakfast we didn't have to ask anybody because people contribute because instinctively we know it is only when you contribute it is only when you give that you grow Karma Siddhanta yahi hai ki the more you are able to contribute the more you will have fulfillment I told you hard work doesn't bring about exhaustion it brings about liberation it brings fulfillment because energy hai kisliye so make all this a habit the thoughts which you are gathering here, it should become part of your thinking. The thoughts I am giving you are from Vivekananda's Karma Yoga. So with this, let us now go into traditionally the three types of karma that are there. Karma Siddhanta is misinterpreted. So you must have this knowledge also. Traditionally what is Karma Siddhanta? This will be very useful to you. Although I am not going to go deep into afterlife and transmigration and all that. Because NRC wants that we keep it in a scientific paradigm. We will not go too much into all that but certain basic things you should know. There are three types of Karma traditionally. Aapne suna hoga Sanchita, Prarabdha aur Kriyamandh. Agami Karma. Suna hai ye shabda? Dekhiye all the Karma which you have done so far over many lives, all the good, bad, whatever you have done, physical Karma, mental Karma, all that put together, the sum total is called Sanchita Karma It is like your capital, it is stocked somewhere Now in this particular life, a slice of that Sanchita Karma is given to you It is activated part of the Sanchita Karma which you have to exhaust in this life. This is called Prarabdha. Many times people say that this is written in my Prarabdha. This is my Prarabdha. It is that Karma which has been given to you to be exhausted in this life. See, think about your situation. Did you choose the circumstances of your birth or your family? Did you choose? What parents you will have? Did you choose the circumstances of your birth or your family? Did you choose? What parents you will have? Did you choose? How your face will look? Did you choose? So, who chose all this? How come you are like this? And this particular environment, kisne choose kiya? This is prarabdha karma, a slice of your sanchita given to you to experience in this life and beyond this prarabdha karma see something called a free will has been installed into you at least a semblance. Is not it a notion of free will has been installed if using that if you take the right decisions of your life and do good work what will happen you set into motion what is called kriyamana karma. The third karma traditional karma through which you can change the situations of your life for the better is not it through your decisions through your choices you create a better life a better future. So, using this ability of kriyamana karma the free will you are able to change prarabdha and if you do it intense enough you can even change sanchita karma which means what the key to change is in your hands. If you will rightly choose and your intention is right, your choices are good, your work will be good. If your work is good, you will be accepted, you will be in a leadership position, you will be successful here. So, you gradually change your prarabdha for the better, is not it? And you do it intense enough even the entire stock of your see prarabdha was like you can say ah the interest given to you on your capital. A monthly interest you get for whatever capital you have deposited in a bank. So, that that monthly interest is somewhat like your prarabdha given to you in this life. Through your will you can change the course of your life through your decisions and actions so this is in your hands, this is called kriyaman karma so you see this traditionally why this karma theory is given you know why they trace causation by tracing causation they are empowering you to fashion your destiny to carve your destiny. That is why the karma theory is there. If you misinterpret it to mean, oh, it is all written in my fate. And if somebody is suffering, you say, this is all misinterpretation of karma theory. Why has this karma siddhanta been given to you? So that by tracing causation, you are able to empower yourself to change and fashion your destiny by yourself. Isi ke liye karma siddhanta hai. And this is how you must use it. You understand many times for centuries in fact, collectively we have misinterpreted karma theory. So let that not not happen again it is something it is a tool meant to empower you please understand this let me give you an example here ah the case of Arjun and Karna in Mahabharat you see how prarabdha and kriyamana karma have worked hm both of them were of divine descent is not it, but Arjun came in such favorable environment and Karna had to struggle right Both of them were of divine descent, isn't it? But Arjun came in such favorable environment and Karna had to struggle right from infanthood. But still he grew up with a charioteer. Jab unko pata chala ki wo kaunte ya hai, Radhe ya nahi hai. Still he, you see, his will was always fixed and using his energy and his actions, he became the king of Anga. Even when he came to know that he is the son of Kunti, he did not budge from his stand. He was a great man. Only thing is, at the end, he should have dedicated all that capacity and character at the feet of the Lord. But he didn't do that. Whatever it is, you see how Prarabdha and Kriyaman Karma work. They work for you. Are you getting the point? Through his ability, through his actions, his intent, his concentration, he built up a great life, Karna. Isn't it? Otherwise he came in such terrible circumstances. The circumstances of his birth. So what I am trying to tell you is, you see how these three karmas work in our lives. It is possible for you to change the course of your life now and in the future through these karmas, through the power of these karmas. Kriyaman karma is actually in your hand. Using it as a powerful tool, you can change prarabdha and sanshita. Now see for yourself how you are able to do it. If you actually read the lives of great people. For example the life of Gautam Buddha. Have you read Jataka tales? You must have read it when you were young. Every Jataka tale is a life, one of the lives of this Buddha, previous lives in which he has done such a good karma it is a life of sacrifice and dedication and service the cumulative effect of all this was the creation of a Buddha finally there is enormous great karma, karmic backpack you can say which is responsible for higher realization without this ah stand by a without this backup of great karma you cannot progress spiritually . So, please understand this is a very important thing which we are discussing . One more thing which ah you should know here is why we misinterpreted Karma. Let this never again become a kind of a philosophy with us. If you see suffering and if you say that is his Karma, you know what you are doing? You are generating enormous negative Karma for yourself. This is not the purpose of Karma theory. Karma theory should only empower you, should only make you go forth and help others. A Karma Yogi's predisposition is like that. If a child is begging, isn't that an insult to whole humanity? Think and see. Your blood should boil when you see a child beg. Nambi Pambi people cannot become Karma Yogis. To become Karma Yogi you must have such a solid will and an intent which is all-consuming which is totally committed to the good of others. That is the only way you can become a Karma Yogi. The whole life, the surge of life energy in you is meant for that. Then you can become a Karma Yogi. Vivekananda was like this. Do you know? That is why he was a Vivekananda. Intense feeling for others. Intense commitment to do good to others. He used to say, they alone live who live for others. The rest are more dead than alive. You are not alive until you are able to make such a contribution to the lives of others. What is the glory of living in your own individuality? You don't even know what that individuality means. At one point, Vivekananda says, do you feel, you just look at these words, they are his own words, so they are very powerful. He says, do you feel that millions and millions of the descendants of gods and sages have become next door neighbors to brutes? Do you feel that millions have been starving for ages and millions are starving today. Do you feel that ignorance has descended upon this land like a dark cloud? Does it make you restless? Does it make you sleepless? As a result, have you forgotten all about your name, your fame, your wives and children, your properties, even your bodies that is the first step the very first step to become a patriot patriotism can normally hey you are completely out of the picture the entire life force is going towards the welfare of humanity and then Vivekananda says for the next 50 years forget all these vain gods. This is the only worship now that there is the worship of the Virat, the immanent God consciousness shining through all living beings. You worship him through service. This is Karma Yoga. It is worship. Isiliye. Doosron ke liye kaam karna vahi pooja hai. Karma hi pooja hai. Karma is worship. Karma and worship are not two different things. So this is the great philosophy of Karma Yoga, which our scriptures are giving us. You have to pay attention to this. You have to remember, in your life, Karma Yoga will play a major part. I don't know how much you will do the second Yoga. But you are committed to, in a way, working for long hours. So make some such philosophy your own, so that you know how to proceed in life, you have something great to connect with all the time. So, Vivekananda ka Karma Yog thoda at least aapko padna chahiye, it is a small book, try to get it and read it then after this Vivekananda used to get very emotional about this because he just wanted to lash up everybody awaken them to the need to work for centuries we have been sleeping have you read your Indian history? why we suffered the invasions, why we suffered so as kind of slavery for 1000 years, misinterpretation of karma theory. Because yoga requires a certain amount of stillness in your system, you apply that to work also that well there is no need to work. This is a totally wrong outlook or a totally wrong philosophy of life if you are not prepared to work you are not going anywhere please remember this collectively we sort of misinterpreted karma theory and we had to suffer for it so at one place Vivekananda says may I be born again and again and suffer a thousand miseries that I may worship the only God I believe in, the sum total of all souls and above all my God the wicked, my God the afflicted, my God the wicked? See this is the spirit of the Karma Yogi. So all these great ideas you must capture and make it your vision, your philosophy of life. Then only it will be meaningful to read Karma Yoga here. Now we will go into a few more ah things. See at one point I had told you three effects of karma, hm connected ideas I am giving you. So, try to catch them. See these are the three effects of karma which I have told you already in one session, ah. One is whenever you perform any action there is an external effect, a physical change due to the action upon which you have to keep an eye. So, that your work is perfect then there is an internal change which is the create creation of sanskar due to the action ah which creates your character basically because character is nothing, but the sum total of your sanskars. And the third effect which you cannot see what is called karma shai is the cosmic effect the unseen effect of which is of the nature of recompense or retribution. Iska matlak kya hai? What is this third effect? Dekhi hum jo Karma Shai keh rahe hai na that is nothing but potential Karma phal. Abhi abhi humne jo Sanchit Karma we studied. This Sanchit Karma is nothing but the collection of your Karmaphal done over so a long period of time. The total amount of Karma which you have done becomes your, the entire Karmaphal becomes your Sanchit Karma. So you see this third effect of any Karma goes to get you your Sanchit karma and become the a slice of that becomes your Prarabdha it again enters your life in different ways. So, yadra kiye this is a a law which nobody can deviate from nobody can actually get out of this out step this law because it is a law it is causation theory it is the connection between cause and effect the force you have put into motion is going to come back to you. So, put forth such forces such positive forces that life becomes all positive always this is in your hands hm it should give you the seriousness to do this. That is why it is called Karma Siddhant. Somehow leading life, anyhow leading life. You know people who are very corrupt don't mind being corrupt. So, the seriousness of the Karma Siddhant has not come into their lives. Exactly what you are going to do to others is going to come back to you. Sometime, some place, somewhere, somehow, ye seriousness aana chahiye life mein. What you sow, that you are going to reap. Now we will go into the how to overcome the effects of karma. See whatever past karma has been generated you can overcome it by good karma now. So long this is what we have been discussing that through your will, through your actions you can change the course of your life. Isn't it? By willing rightly you can change the course of your life. You see if you have wound a particular thread like this you can unwind it like this isn't it so if you generate a lot of positive karma it helps counteract negative karma is a little price should accept the hey low price should why do they do it they want to get rid of some bad past karma there are ways to overcome karma in the second session, I I think second and third session also, I told you about the yogic way of understanding karma. Do you remember? What is all our what are all our problems due to if you say karma then actually basically they are due to clashes you remember we had discussed this they are five in number raag, dvesh, bhai, asmita and avidya the source sense, the source of all this is avidya. So the yogic system, how it sees, uh, how to get out of this karma chakra is to destroy this glaciers to reduce them to the, what they call tanu karana state means a state where they become completely deactivated. How can you reduce fear to that state? Just think and see or any emotion. How can you reduce that by replacing it with good emotions? Pratipakshabhavanam is a very huge theory of Patanjali Yog Sutras. Iska matlab hai jab negative feelings mann mein aate hain, see practically this is how it will be useful to you. You must have the power to remove the negativity convert them into positive emotions. Suppose somebody shouts at you, will you shout back? What will be your immediate reaction? What will happen if you shout back? Everybody will be shouting that is the end of the solution. But if you pause and although you know that person is yelling at you, still you remain calm and with a smile you tell the the the cause for the problem, that person will have the sense to listen at least. Nothing happens by shouting back, isn't it? Pratipaksh bhavan mane yahi hai If a negative thought arises in your mind Change it immediately Replace it with a positive thought This is a possibility When is it a possibility? If you are aware, self aware If you are only identified with a negative thought This is not possible Isiliye mene kaha thoda sa yog jeevan mein laana chahiye Then what happens? Anger arises, I can see it So I will handle it properly I have not become anger, I have not become like a volcano myself any negative emotion arising in the mind I can see it objectively and that is why I can handle it so this is the yogic way of getting rid of negative karmas all this because you see basically they are due to your this negative affective aspect negative emotions all of these you see, ragdvesh, bhai they are all negative emotions you can replace them make this your habit aapke jeevan mein negativity nahi aayegi if you make this a habit if you are constantly negative and over egoistic and only trying to put down others, talking ill of others don't think you can, your own mind you cannot live in that mind after sometime you want to step out of that mind this is the cause for depression you have brought in too much of negativity into the mind hm. So, learn this replacement technique it is possible to do this constantly on an everyday basis feel the goodness of life the glory of great emotions in your mind this is how you develop your life step by step. Feel the this this attitude of witness Jomai boldly yogically you can actually step back from the mind and see it for what it is. It gives so much of refreshment within actually you know it renews your life energies to to be in the same mind which is full of negative mental blocks. It's a terrible experience actually See, immediately you are able to relate with this idea because this is what is happening because of lack of training in yoga, we are not able to bear with our minds So solutions are being given to you one by one. Bring this into your life. On an everyday basis, you will be renewing yourself. You will be refreshing yourself. Then, you won't need so much entertainment. All the time, you are alert, alive. The more alive you are, the more happy you will be. This kind of synthetic joy is not required. Naturally you are joyous. Look at little children bubbling with joy. Is not it? So, this is the yogic way of overcoming the dismantling the karmic structure you can say. How? By handling the experiences in your mind. Whatever negativities replace them with positivities. Yes. What is the karma behind a new born baby? You see this is a question which I will answer after this class because just now we are covering a portion we will I'll answer it after this class okay the the thing is the way to the the yogic method actually aims at generating awareness please understand this jab a thought process ko stop karte ho do you vanish from the place? From the experience? You remain over as what? As awareness. Please see this. So if you have generated this higher awareness, you can control any thought process. The negativities that are in our mind, the way to control them is to remain as the awareness always mind itself means thoughts dancing upon awareness thought ko apne itna importance de diya, you forgot about the awareness portion so yogic process is culturing this awareness, bringing it to the forefront so that you are able to handle the thought process, iss se you are able to handle karma very well, you can dismantle the karmic structure which is binding you. Then we will go to Vedanta, Vedanta kya ke thay, see these ideas are very important to you, just now you may not realize it. After some time only this will become important, this will stand all important in your life. So, let me give these ideas to you here just now how Vedanta deals with karma you know it will ask fundamentally who is the doer kis par karma phala raha hai? who is the experiencer who is the doer of action who are you basically who is the enjoyer of the action who is the enjoyer of the action? Who is the experiencer of the action? Who is the doer and the experiencer? This is Vedanta. You must be able to track the real you. So, for this, let me first show you some slides and then I will give you an illustration which will remain in your mind. See, for this we have to come, I asked you a fundamental question who am I, who are you, who is the doer and experiencer of action. Now you must know the difference between Vedantic thinking and classical Greek thinking, western thinking. You see human personality paradigm according to western psychology is dichotomous body plus mind hm. So, this is characteristic you see platonic model was a human being is substance which is body form mind and both perish after death. Aristotelian model was the same understanding, but believed creative reason survived death. So, basically man is human personality is body plus mind. In fact, that is what you feel just now, isn't it? So, this is the classical Greek model of human personality. Vedantic model, however, says you are body plus mind plus spirit or what is called the Atman. This is the exclusive trichotomous model of human personality. Now is there any proof for this that I am the Atman, consciousness, I am spirit itself? Is there any proof? Do you feel it? You you see just listen with great attention otherwise you can't catch it. Do you feel awareness in your mind or not? Do you feel awareness or not yes see if you have a sense of yourself apart even from thought and you always have that sense you have not paid attention to it I am telling you your body and mind are as much an object to you as any other object here. As awareness all the time you are existing as awareness. Iska kya proof hai? You see there are so many proofs strewn in your own everyday experience. For example if I tell you, if you stop thought, what remains over? Does anything remain over? Or nothing? Kuch bhi nahi rehta? A little yogic concentration and you will understand awareness, a kind of aliveness about you, self-awareness is always there. Thoughts come and move out of that. Thought is entering that awareness, going out of it. When it enters the awareness, you call it conscious thought. When it goes out, it becomes unconscious. But awareness is the fundamental reality of life. Do you see any sense in this? In fact, your I-sense is totally disconnected from body, which so long you have thought is yours is you your your sense of I do you feel your age anytime you don't feel your age whether you are 10 or 20 or 40 you have to remember your age to feel it if it becomes a thought then you will feel oh I'm 40 years old or I'm 30 years old I'm 20 years old but your experience of life it just bypasses your age because it is awareness cannot age it has no age how many clues are there just look at your experiences at any given moment of time you are conscious of body only if you make yourself conscious of it. If you choose to identify you become body conscious not otherwise otherwise you are only alive this is your permanent experience at any given moment of time. Awareness is fundamental even to the thought process. Before you think you are. If you have, if there is some problem in your body, maybe your stomach ache, are you able to know the why and how of it? No, some external instrument has to tell you. Isn't it? Doctor ke paas aap jaate ho, he will take a CT scan or an endoscopy Something he will do and tell you what is the problem where You are not able to know what is the problem where Awareness is minimally invested in the body, unless you choose it Which means what? Your sense of aliveness, awareness has nothing to do with body, mind as such They are instruments through which you are functioning. Are you able to grasp this? See it is entirely based on personal experience. Check and see if what if this is true or not. You have to check by yourself. Sit in silence for some moments and dwell on this and see Isme koi satyata hai ya nahi? Is this a possibility or not? There is no single entity which has for its co-existence both the I sense and the body That is why I am the body idea has no basis in truth. This is the fact of your life. You have to find out by yourself not because I am saying it or some scripture is saying it see check and see for yourself if this is true or not. If this is true then this is what Vedanta is telling you. Your consciousness embodied functioning through a body and mind and the strong clues which they give you is your existence is evident with or without body and mind. You see even when you are not thinking you are there. When you are not conscious of anything physical you are there which means what you are not merely body and mind and through the three states of waking dream and sleep you are able to say something about the three states which means you are apart from them. Consciousness is neither the waker dreamer nor the deep sleeper. So, this we will go into a little more little later on, but basically you should know this fundamental differences Vedanta will tell you your consciousness functioning through a body and mind. You are not merely this body mind complex. Now, this creates a huge this is huge implications isn't it? Your idea of yourself is something very different they are telling you. Now the implications of this will be enormous. A closer look at this is, this is the Panchakosha model of Vedanta. Ispar aap nazar dalo. Dekho dekho at the core of your personality structure they say is the Atman. Enshrouded by intellect, then mind, then life energies, then body. Now, you are taking only body, prana and mind to be yourself. This is the fundamental error they tell you. So, minds is not it, what exactly is death? Body falls, the rest of you if this is the model of you of your personality, what happens to the rest of you? What happens to mind? It should go somewhere no, when the body falls. See I will give you a simple illustration. Now do not pay attention to that image just listen to this illustration. Suppose I keep a bucket of water in the afternoon in the open, a bucket of water hm the sun which is shining in the sky gets reflected in that bucket of water. Now as an illustration I will say this bucket is like your body, the water inside the bucket is your mind, the reflected sun in that water is your ego sense your I sense. Now, if you consider your body to be this bucket, if the bucket starts leaking or gets damaged or something then you will shift the entire water and that that reflected sun along with it ah. The water basically you will shift into another bucket, is not it? An empty bucket there you will shift it there. So, you will you will say the water transmigrated reincarnated in another bucket. If you think the body is like the bucket there the body fell. So, the water got transferred into another bucket, but tell me truly if you are only that sun shining well, bucket died, kicking the bucket only they say in English. Hai na? Death ko kicking the bucket hi kehte hai. What exactly is death? This is what I am trying to tell you. Body falls, but the rest of you is carried over. The mind gets carried over, the mind I said is the like the water in that bucket hm and the reflected sun your ego sense, your the reflected awareness in your mind that is also there in that second bucket. But the real you is none of this, it is the sun shining there, your consciousness is ever present, occasionally it gets identified with the body mind complex which means occasionally the the light of the sun thinks it is in the bucket in the water. This is how we are feeling we are just now we feel hum is sharir mein hai na. Actually this body is nothing but a vritti in your consciousness, arising in your consciousness. Your experience of life is usually like this. Aapne is par dhyani nahi diya hai kisi samay. Isiliye this appears like a fantastic theory to you now. But think and see. Yek illustration mein dekhe, I will finish this session. Did you catch the point what I am trying to say? If you think you are the bucket, yes the bucket is left over and the water transmigrated to another bucket. So, reincarnation afterlife all this is real. The reflected the sun got reflected there also ok. It it is a real experience, but if you are the real sun none none of this, then is there transmigration for you is there an afterlife. There is nothing of that sort. Vedanta tells you the real you is unchanging consciousness that got reflected in the water of your mind and you started thinking I am that reflection that reflected Sun and it got identified with the bucket of water also which is carrying that reflected Sun so then when that bucket gets damaged you thought I died and you are shifted to another bucket Samajh mein aa raha the point? Actually nothing has happened. The real Sun remains as it is. But to understand and experience it, we need the power of Yoga. Right now it is Vritti Jnana in your mind. You are just understanding it through thoughts. This is not enough to get the experience of it you need experience through yoga you will see this is exactly the fact of life that they are speaking about your experience is always first-person experiences through the instrumentation of body and mind which which means you cannot be the body and mind merely. You are always consciousness functioning through this body and mind. So this knowledge, it comes only first hand. It will only come in the first person. It will only be perfectly original and real to you whenever it comes into you because it's a fact about you at any given moment of time so thoda sa yog aap jeevan mein lao vedanta will become obviously true usko samjhane ke bhi zarurat nahi padti hai tab because it's a it's an obvious fact of my life the truth about the I is consciousness alone. The rest is identification born truths which are only temporary. Look at your thought forms, you always say they are my thoughts, you do not say they are me. Anger, hatred anger hatred love whatever arises in your mind they are your thoughts thoughts of whom yeah I sense yeah hey homie what is the unchanging element there only consciousness or pure awareness is unchanging the rest is coming and going in that awareness. Because you have not been able to catch that consciousness, this whole thing appears to be real. So, from the Vedantic standpoint, karma is a very low level theory, you can say, because who is actually the karma phal bhokta only the body mind can add the most experience there is no experience as such for consciousness so you see that's why it's a relative law I told you but it is important because 99% of us except very high yogis we are identified with the body mind complex. Jab tak is sakshi ka anubhav na hua ho, you will not understand karma theory in full. Vedanta ka anubhav jab tak na hua ho. Until then we are identified with body mind and so karma theory holds for us. It is a important law for us. Did you get the point. So we will stop here today see a little philosophical we have to get for karma theory because otherwise you cannot grasp its entire implications some point in your life this will be useful to you let us stop here time is up. Let's stop here. Time is up.
 Music Today we are going to study duty. What is duty? Is every act a duty or not? Duty is one of those universal abstract terms like consciousness, like love. It's difficult to define them, but we will try because duty is such a very important concept you see sometimes you can understand these abstract ideas better without words isn't it we know it very well its value its importance but we will try to put it into definable terms. Is the sense of moral obligation you feel in any given situation? Is the sense of that I ought to be doing this which you feel? Another definition which I gave you in the last class was Kant's definition. The inner categorical imperative. Something I have to do. Ya hi karaniya hai. Is in this situation that is duty you can say it's an it's the volitional expression of your conscience some an inner directive that you need to do this you can call that as duty so you see in our own way we can understand what duty means. Last class you must have understood the entire deontological perspective of ethics, it is based on this concept of duty. And in Indian culture also it has been held given the highest place, devotion to duty is the highest thing in life. If there is devotion to duty that duty itself will carry you forward. So, what we are today calling excellence in the workplace is something like duty, giving out the best performance that you are capable of dedicated work hm. So, all this is included under duty ah one remarkable thing about duty is it is in a sense it is based on your identifications. If you are identified with one particular thing, you have a particular set of duties like for example, you are students now. So, it is mandatory the your mandatory duty is to study hm for a teacher for a doctor there are definite set of duties which they have to perform because they are identified with the profession of a teacher or a doctor or whatever. Take the case of a soldier ah he see if any way any just any man shoot somebody on the road you will call it murder and he will be put behind bars, but if a soldier kills 20 people along the enemy line he he is considered to be doing great duty is not it. So, in a way it depends on your identification what role you are identified with, what is your station of life at that particular moment accordingly your duties are set and if you are not identified with anything else also as a human being since you identify with this body mind mechanism you have certain humanitarian duties humanitarian values what we say. So, duty is based on that . So, duty is an abstract concept and we have to draw ah many things from it. Vivekananda used to say you know in Vivekananda's karma yog there is one whole chapter devoted to duty and there he says that it is difficult to define duty on the objective front because duties are different for different people, but on the subjective front you can define duty . Anything that elevates you and ennobles you is your duty. And anything that degrades you, makes you feel bad about yourself, that is not your duty. Now you think about what this means. Duty naturally means something which is helpful to you something which builds your life elevates your life. This is another one definition that is there then there is this concept of what is called swadharma in our culture ah. It is actually ah a duty peculiar to your nature is called swadharma. It is a special kind of duty you can say peculiar to your nature. Later we will go towards it ah what it means, but just here you should know about it. Another thing which Vivekananda points out is not the duty is always easy, is not it it? Sometimes duties can be very difficult. In fact, Vivekananda says, Duty is seldom sweet. Rarely is it sweet. It becomes sweet only when love greases its wheels. He says. Which means what many times, the duties we have to perform, they may not be to our liking, nor do we have any inclination to do, but karna pad raha hai, aisa situation aa sakta hai. But just because it's your duty, you have to do it. Intelligent is that man who converts his duties into something which he is able to do with gusto, with joy, with happiness one who is able to do his duties in that manner accepting that this to be the universal way of life one who is able to dedicate himself to his duty one who develops devotion to his duty that man becomes truly great these are all qualities of leadership which your modern leadership paradigm may not give you but they are part and parcel of your culture in this culture always duty was placed above everything else the entire deontological ethics is based on duty so this is a concept which you should deeply think about in any situation you must ponder and think what is my duty in this situation? If someone doesn't ask me to do something, I won't do it. This is not the answer. This is not right thinking. As a human being here in this particular situation, under these conditions, what should be my ideal duty? This is something for all of us to think about I had told you that action will be good and reliable only if you think a bit before you jump into the act If you don't think at all, if it's just pure impulse Then you can never know where that impulse will take you So we have to think about duty also Whenever you find yourself in a conundrum, in a kind of enigmatic situation, puzzle, then you must think what should my duty be and you will get the right answer. If you don't ask this question, what should be my duty in this situation, there will be no inclination towards action in the right direction. So, this concept of duty is so important that is why it has been elevated to such an extent hm. If you read the life of a great historical heroes you will see total dedication to duty not what they felt was nice at that moment not what according to public nice at that moment not what according to public opinion did they didn't move according to all this they were not whimsical they were always predictable because they were duty-bound so to become the center of reliability that is what a leader is isn't it you have to be dutiful kisi bhi situation mein mera kartav ya kya hai? This should be paramount. If you want to be a real leader, if you want to get genuine respect in life, then you must think of duty. That is why we are going to discuss this extensively. Vivek Ananda also says, see duty is sweet only through love, through inclusiveness. Don't think a karma yogi is a man of mere will, very strong will. Every bit of him is well developed. That is why the expression and action is like that. So this is one aspect of duty. Another thing is it is only we can only rise by doing the duty next to us. Whenever we ask questions like what is the purpose of life, what is the goal of life you know the only way you can move towards the highest goals of life is by doing the duty that has fallen upon you. Due to your identifications, due to your station in life. So this is a matter of thinking? What should be my duty then? Today you are students. Tomorrow you will be somewhere else, in some particular position. Then what should be my duty? Your decision making depends on this, your identifications. And so, it is something to think about. You should not leave it just to the abstract plane. Vivekananda used to give a story here while talking of this idea He gives a very good story Sometimes it comes in our mind My particular station of life, is that the highest duty or is there a greater duty and a lesser duty? It comes, which is the best duty? So this story is based on that you see there was a king in a kingdom who was always asking questions to his courtiers and the wise men in his kingdom as to which is the greatest duty is it ah well ah ah a householder who takes all ah all the duties in his ah that ah who actually is able to do all his duties in a dedicated spirit who is able to contribute vastly to society is he greater or is a sanyasi who does not take up any duty responsibility at home, but who searches God is this a greater dharma. He used to ask which is a greater duty between the two and then many wise men gave him their ideas their counsel, but he was not satisfied. One day you just listen to this story properly and it will show it will give a very valuable lesson to you ah stories remain in our minds is not it. So, just pay attention to this story. One day one sadhu came to his kingdom, came to his palace and the king asked him also who is greater is it the the duty of a householder greater or that of a sadhu or sanyasin. And then this sadhu said each is great in his own place my lord, each is great, do't compare the two, in their own place each is great, then the king said well what proof do you have for this, how do you know each is great in their own place, then the sadhu said okay you come with me, I will demonstrate and show you, so he took him for a long walk into another kingdom, or in the marketplace of that kingdom there was a swayamvar going on swayamvar so in those days princes used they used to select their husbands through a swayamvar and a lot of nobles had gathered there and princes were there and now this princess had to select a suitor prince now this princess was very choosy. Many times her father had conducted this swayamvar and she had not selected anybody. So this time another one phase of that was going on. So she went about with a garland in her hand. Now you remember our king and that sadhu are standing there. They suddenly noticed in that crowd of people another young sanyasin came there and stood there and this girl who was going around with that garland in her hand, she went and garlanded that sanyasin, that young man and he was enraged and he removed the garland, threw it on the ground and said what is this and then the king of that kingdom he thought maybe he is a poor man so he does not want to accept his daughter so immediately he announced that whoever marries my daughter gets half my kingdom and after my death he will get the whole kingdom so he is sort of offering him everything so as to say, but this young man was furious, this young sanyasin and he just threw the garland and everything and started running away from there. And this crazy girl, this princess, she started following him and then then our king and the the sadhu also they thought let us follow them and see what happens. So then the the young sanyasin made his way to the forest and he knew all the forest path so he just vanished from there and this girl did not know which way to go so she sat under a tree and started crying. Now this king and the sadhu came there and they reassured her they told her we will show you the way back to your palace but it was already night so they all rested under a tree. Now under that tree ah they they all sat down there and on that tree was the family of a bird there was a bird and his his wife and his three little ones who were very dedicated to their duties. Now he was such a ideal householder this bird he immediately saw that three people had come under his tree. So, they are his guests you remember that injunction in the Vedas so, he has to do something for them he thought and it is so, cold it is it is going to be nightfall. So, he went somewhere and bought a small fire brand hm and then he he put it on the ground and immediately they added twigs to it and created a fire and so, they were a warm enough. Then he he told his wife that you see these three people are there they are our guests, but we have nothing to ah no food to give them and in this night where can I go in search of food. So, let me do a thing I will sacrifice my body I will jump into this fire and so, they can roast me and have me for food and he actually jumped into the fire that bird. Now he saw the wife of this bird saw that one bird is not enough and how can I allow my husband's dharma to go waste, his sacrifice, how can I allow it to go waste. So she also jumped into the fire and the little, three little, little birds, little ones of these, this couple, they also jumped into the fire, offering their bodies as food for these guests. Now of course these guests could not eat that, eat those birds but immediately they understood the extent of dutifulness, the extent of sacrifice in these birds and then the next day the sannyasin showed that princess her way home and then he told the king you see my lord if you have to be a householder if you are identified with that duty you must be like this birds you see how great is their sacrifice how great is their sense of duty and if you are identified with the dharma of a sannyasin you must be like that young man who could have got everything but who did not show respect for anything. Completely detached from everything. So I say each is great in his own place, but at the same time, the duty of the one is not the duty of the other. Duties are different, but any duty performed with entire dedication complete consecration will lead you to the highest which duty is greater whose duty is greater which is the particular position of life that is the station of life that is greater any duty previously we discussed the story of that Vyad, the butcher and that common house lady You see just performance of duty with dedication, with love and they have reached the highest knowledge So this is the nature of duty, if it is performed with detachment, with love You see this is something you have to work upon, with love and yet with detachment, with love. You see this is something you have to work upon with love and yet with detachment. With a certain sense of dedication, it can take you to the highest values of life. Isi liye toh kehte hai yeh param dharma hai, duty, kartavya. And if you put it aside just because you have certain whims, because you are given too much to your emotions, because your friends told you something, if you do not do your duty at any particular point you will pay for it that is all. He becomes a leader who is dutiful. So, the whole team knows he is completely reliable, he is predictable in any particular situation. Jo apna duty karte hain such a person alone will be relied upon, because in any particular situation. Jo apna duty karte hain, such a person alone will be relied upon. Because in any situation everybody knows how he will react, what he will do. Isiliye this concept of duty it is all in all for the Karma Yogi. In any situation of life he will do what is jo uchit hai, not what pleases him, not what pleases others, not what public opinion says but what is the right duty at that particular point, he will only do that so that's why you should think about it, in the complicated situations of our modern day life how duty bound we can be and what duty should mean in any particular situation if your mind is clear you will immediately understand what is your duty in any particular situation if the mind is not clear enough then you will not get the answer even if you think a lot what is right for me to do in this situation so this is a general introduction you have to work upon it, we are going to give you practicals you know which we will be discussing at the end of this session. So, there also we will take up this idea practically how you will use these ideas. So, it is this idea that was always kept uppermost in in almost all cultures you know it is not just here. Because everybody understands in a sense the sense of duty is what augments human evolution, what pushes human evolution and it is not just surrender to your emotions or whatever if a human being is not dutiful he is not reliable Instinctively you know this isn't it just look at your own home if your parents had not done their duties would you be where you are today their duties towards you their duties towards your, their duties towards your education, their duties towards making you stand on your own feet, their duties towards your neighbours, their duty towards your school teachers, they did everything as it was appropriate to the situation and so you are here today. If every man did his duty, the world would be a very beautiful place. It's only when we don't understand the concept of duty and we are insensitive to it or we neglect it, then all problems come into our lives. Whether I like it or not, whether my friends support it or not, I will do what is the right thing to do in any particular situation. This disposition you should develop will is ke liye hi hota hai without caring for anything you must do your kartavya jo kehte hai jo karani hai now let me go take a little detour to just explain another concept to you see suppose in a family there are four children and each one has different endowments, one is has great intellectual capacity, another one has great artistic talent, another one has great physical resilience, another one is very caring and loving type. Now each one has different characteristics you see. This was the basis of our Varna and Ashrama system in the past in Vedic India and this initial procedure to divide labour and profession based on the ability and excellence of youngsters that turned into the horrendous caste system later on. And, all great thinkers who were born in India starting from Buddha to Vivekananda all of them put down the caste system because anything based on birth or lineage is not the ultimate thing about the person. It should be based on your character on your sense of duty on the work that you do ah that decides that is the defining attribute about you. So they have all upheld they upheld the ideal of the Brahmana that is the Brahmin who is a super sattvic person, but they put down the caste system many times division of labor in many countries they have their they have had their own kinds of caste system and here also you know the extent to which it developed. So they have put this down only for this simple reason that a man's worth is decided not by his birth and lineage but by his actions, by his character, by his sense of duty, moral obligation that defines you. Or iske liye you see in the dhammapada I have a quotation here from the dhammapada it says not by matted hair nor by lineage nor by caste does one become a brahmana he is a brahmana in whom there is truth and righteousness. He might call a brahmana whose wisdom is deep and he possesses knowledge who discerns the right way and the wrong and who has attained the highest end. There is a beautiful incident in the life of the famous Hindi author Mahavir Prasad Vivedi. He, unone ek bahut sundar unke jeevan mein yeh hua tha. You see his home was in a village, his ancestral home. So, one day he had gone to that village and he was moving about in the fields there and suddenly he heard the scream of a woman. So, he ran there and saw what was happening. This woman was fallen on the ground and a snake had bitten her and she was wailing and shouting. Now, at once you see with a snake bite immediately you have to stop the poisonous blood from flowing isn't it so you have to compress that artery you need a tourniquet you have to compress that artery now for him he did not have an extra piece of cloth so what he did he removed his janeu upavit kehte hai na yagna upavit the sacred did he removed his janeo, upavit kehte hai na, yagna upavit, the sacred thread, he removed that and he tied her foot where where the bite had taken place he tied the on the top and below the wound and immediately the poison stopped from spreading and her life was saved but a number of people gathered there when he was doing this and a huge crowd gathered and then there was an orthodox Brahmin in that crowd and he started saying you use the sacred thread for this purpose tying it to a shudra woman's leg and all these things he started saying immediately. Vivediji stood up and said I have put my sacred thread to good use. This is the definition of a Brahmin. He who is compassionate. What is the meaning of saying Brahmin, non-Brahmin, Shudra, this and that when human life is at stake. I have put my sacred thread, my janeo to very good use and I am proud of it. So you see this is the spirit of a true Brahmin in the Vedas there is this statement yo dayavan sarva bhuteshu sarvada sa dvijas reshta so as we evolve in life what happens more empathy and compassion come into our life that is why the deep sense of dutifulness comes tomorrow you will be earning huge salaries you should know how to use that money abhi understand the value of all these discussions then you will become dutiful towards others you will understand you are that that money is with you as a trustee it is to be given to for welfare purposes social welfare just today somebody had come to our ashram and they were telling us the condition in villages really the condition of even women in villages is so pathetic no freedom, education, although that right to education has been installed how many are getting educated? the family itself restricts the education of girls children so you see there is a lot to do and you must consider it to be your duty at some point in life you will understand this unless you are doing for others continuously on a everyday basis no peace or fulfillment can enter your life don't think peace and fulfillment come only through yoga yoga itself is possible only through karma, great selfless karma, then yoga is possible. So, make this part of your thinking right now, dutifulness in any particular context or situation of life. This is our dharma you know our swadharma, this is what we should be doing. As young people even more, even more this impulse constantly to do good to help wherever we can should come into our lives and you will see your life will become very beautiful. Aap apne ghar mein hi dekho, yeh karke dekho thoda and you will see what a beautiful family it will be. Agar yeh nahi karoge na, there will then you keep blaming others and you yourself will go into depression at some point because you have not contributed. Hmm. Many times we discuss this idea of yagna, try to digest it, assimilate it completely. So karma is always remember not just what you do, what you fail to do, when you had the resources, when you had the capacity, yet you didn't pay attention because you were busy with your ego that creates a lot of negative karma. So, be a giver contributor, if you want success in life please know this, you must be a selfless contributor wherever you can and all success will descend upon you. TK this in this course this one thing you should digest if I want success in life I must be a contributor. Now Vivekananda you actually defined you know good and bad based on selfish unselfishness and selfishness he used to say the difference between God and the devil is nothing but unselfishness and selfishness. He used to say the difference between God and the devil is nothing, but unselfishness and selfishness. The devil you know he knows as much as God please see this and he is as powerful as God only he has no holiness he has no unselfishness in him. So, he has become the devil you don't become a god just by knowledge you become a god by using that knowledge in the right direction so the very definition of what is good is what is unselfish make this a part of your thinking and life then we will now go into the psychology of success hm because for to develop leadership skills understand this basically a dutiful disposition of mind. You watch the life of any leader even if you take these great business houses of India today like Reliance for example, Dhirubhai Ambani's life have you read ah the founder of Reliance Industries and or the founder of Infosys Narayan Murthy's life or Bill and Melinda Gates read their lives and see you will see they were the the very disposition was how what can I contribute in this particular situation. They developed that right from a very young age . This is the secret of success. You see today's workshops may not tell it to you so bluntly, but this is the basic secret of success that everybody finds you reliable in every particular situation. You are a contributor everywhere, are not a go-getter You have a very well-developed, advanced EQ which is called emotional quotient and spiritual quotient They become like this What can I do for you? So, you see, for success what you need is a very intelligent mind, but a beautiful mind, a dutiful mind and then inclusive ambitions. Ambitions will be there, they should be there at your age, they should be inclusive not inclusive, not exclusive hm and then that will give you greater skill, more accountability and more expertise in your workplace, isn't it? If you are purely exclusive, you know you do not know how to contribute that is the meaning. So, ah the leadership thing will fail in you. So, try to catch all these points right now. Vivekananda used to say the the whole secret of work he gives you the individual secret and the collective secret of success in life. Just watch this. He says individual success for that we already discussed this idea you must be very concentrated take up one idea think of it of it, live on that one idea Let your brain, muscles and nerves be full of that idea And leave every other idea alone This is the secret of success So high level competence and excellence And this level of concentration ensures your success individually This is what you want to achieve. So, this is the secret of individual success. We are very good at this Indians as a whole are very good at this. Our problem is in collective success. You see the next thing which Vivekananda says is collectively the whole secret of success for us as a nation lies in organization, accumulation of power, coordination of wills, being of one mind is the secret of society. The basis of this is character, mutual trust and team spirit. Please remember this when it comes to organization many times we fail because many times our own mind is not organized. If our own will is not fixed and directed in a particular direction, how are you going going to coordinate other wills? So, this art of organization means the art of first organizing your mind, your capacities and then you can inspire others with it. Many times we falter here collectively you see this mutual trust, team spirit, success in an organization comes only by the power of character. All of these are included in collective success. You take any any event in India, if it is an individual even sports event, we are very successful there, but if it is a team well we are learning to be successful. So, we must learn to coordinate wills and work together. You know to work to be able to work together there is a particular mindset which you must develop this is part of your psychology of success. First of all you must be able to accept others on par with you um in an organization this is so important. Secondly your speech should be sweet Many times we ruin our own success by just giving vent to our whatever emotions are taking place in our head. Communication skills should be there, otherwise you cannot carry on any organized collective work and thus the team spirit should be very strong which means what you give credit to others you are able to empower others you take into consideration the opinions of others you don't consider yourself to be supreme you are able to delegate work then you will be able to extract work and respect so these are all parts of collective success there are small things, if you practice from now So, these are all parts of collective success. Choti choti cheezein hain, abhi se agar practice kar lo, you see it will become part of your life. To work in harmony with others is a great art. Many times we are at harmony with ourselves, but not with others. But real development means being able to work with others in a very harmonious spirit and bringing success there. So, as I told you if you read the lives of these great ones you will see how they they were able to do it. A leader essentially means this he is able to coordinate the wills of others, his own will is so fixed, so determined he is able to coordinate the wills of others hm. One more thing which I would like to tell you is, you should remember success and failure they appear to be vastly different in the beginning, but if you are your system is not trained, the end of both is the same which means what whether you are driving a BMW or a Mercedes or just cycling across the road, your happiness depends upon the state of your mind, the unobstructed flow of life energy in you, your vital energies. If they are in a particular state of refinement, you will always be happy. It actually does not depend upon your BMW or Mercedes, you can have that no problem, but your happiness depends upon the states of your mind, a very developed mind will be happy anywhere. So, the essential thing if you have not fixed and you are only fixing the outside, you will lose upon even if you are very successful in life, you will lose upon these basic things. You are very successful in your profession, but the domestic life is in shambles. So no happiness, no peace. Aisa bhi hota hai na? In so many families this is going on. Even nuclear families are not able to stay together. Why? These basic things we have not corrected. First, I I must be aware of what is going on in my own system, how developed it is. If I am able to be at peace with myself and develop a mind which is inclusive, you will be very successful anywhere. So, understand these things hm. You see what are the negativities which we have egoistic resistance to the bounty of universal life. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ego means then not being able to contribute due to perverted and exaggerated ideas about oneself then playing with life energies when you play with relationships you are playing with life energy it is not good so these basic things are bolna pad raha hai At a time our cultural values were so strong, we did not have to go to this level at all. But now you must understand, take these things very seriously. Later on we are going to discuss your Swadharma. What are your special duties? In that also I will be dwelling upon this. So understand at the human level, you know know this is why the human being is different from animals for an animal survival is sufficient, but at the human level survival is only the first step after that comes psychosocial evolution the mind develops your goals develop they become more expansive broad inclusive and that leads to spiritual evolution. So, it is a ladder of evolution in the case of the human being. Human being is the only species who stands erect, please see this, your head is above everything else. So, you must use those energies, you must use that intellectual capacity to build your life, animals are always flat isn't it, okay. Now we will go into this particular slide, you see your special duties, NRC we told me please outline this for our students, so I would say you see the very first thing you should know about yourself What is your special role in our society? The greater your brilliance, the higher your responsibility Do you understand this? You are not very young now You must understand what you have been endowed with It's a very small percentage of Indian population which has this level of intellect, this capacity of the brain. Since you have it in your life, your responsibility increases, your responsibility towards your society, towards your nation, towards the world at large. Your responsibilities will be more. Remember whatever God has endowed us with to the extent we are able to use it in the right direction to its utmost capacity to that extent you will evolve or evolution there is you need not go and practice it. No other yoga is required if you are doing your karma as a form of worship. So, the more greater your intelligence, the greater becomes your responsibility naturally. So, now, understand your responsibilities. You see when the IAS was instituted hm after our independence, they adopted a motto. This is that motto yoga karma sukha Koshalam. Yoga is dexterity in action, excellence and energy and character. The the efficiency of work comes from all of this. Yoga itself means excellence, dexterity in action, perfection in action. So, your mind is completely there that is what yoga is. So, make this part of your life this should be your motto excellent excellence in performance no matter what you do. Complete dedication of life energy at the moment to the action to be performed ah this should be your special characteristic because you are in such an institute tomorrow you are going to be the leaders of the future. Excellence should be your stamp and then you must stand firm like a rock when it comes to principles. You know there is a difference between opinions and principles. What is the difference between opinion and principle? Principle means there are certain things in life which are fixed, which don't change. To be principled means to connect with them. Like I will be truthful, I will be absolutely honest, I will be inclusive in my outlook if you want to be a leader this should be you must be highly principled person I I will manage my time if you are if you don't have time management can you be a leader tell me if you are not able to give your best in any performance can you be successful as a leader your subordinate is better than, can you be successful as a leader? Your subordinate is better than you, can you be a leader? Isiliye mein keh rahi hoon, certain principles in your life should be fixed, I will not move from that. What you take up you should be excellent in that, completely dedicated, truthful, honest, sincere to the core and very high level character, these are basic principles of life. You will not naturally be a leader wherever you you go, you will be a leader. In any workplace, any company, any corporate, you will be an asset. And manifest heroic character iska matlab hai giving in just to peer pressure or public opinion that doesn't befit you you must be capable of taking independent decisions the more intellectual capacity you have, the more independence you must have people will look up to you, look up to your decisions in the future so become aware of this right now you have to prepare yourself then the ideal of Raja Rishi is there in our culture tomorrow when you are well established in life this ideal you should be able to manifest. Our many Kings were Rishis. You have plenty in this life you are all successful in this life, at the same time you have the tempo of a Rishi, you are seeking great higher ideals in life. Raja aur Rishi ka combination. You earn the best here, you get the best here, at the same time you are a high level contributor, at the same time you have a Rishi like outlook what can I do for you is your philosophy of life and you have dedicated your life energies to higher search higher research life purpose what is the meaning of the self-realization and all that we talk about this should become real to you I am not going too much into that because we will come to that later on but an ability to understand the higher purposes of life to make them real this should become part of this will naturally become part of your thinking because no matter, you understand this is a psychological law no matter what goodness comes to you material goodness comes to you in this life, you will always be asking for more. So where does it end? That is why there is something called the science of spirituality, the science of consciousness. At some point you will feel this intensely, but now you must the ideal of a Raja Rishi is available to you. In fact that is the ideal every enlightened citizen should have. You are a Raja and a Rishi combined. In a democracy everybody is a Raja, isn't it? And yet a Rishi. Our Janak had many R kings who were sages. They were Brahma Rishis. So this combination is very ideal for Ayatins. Then, service first and service last. Service is your ideal of life. With the kind of education you are getting, you must be able to contribute hugely to society. Take this as part and parcel of your life do not think oh 9 to 5 the same old routine again and again. See if you have a goal for your service activity for whatever activity you are doing if the goal is service based it is bringing happiness to others at once your life will become beautiful very exuberant. If it is only for well my ego myself you you do not like it yourself after sometime. So, have a broad expansive goal um service first and service last this is your motto and then inviolate family values for a healthy society. This is something you must you must know do not think ah all these values are only for sociologists or ah you must know you see an inviolate family relationship is the basis of man's development. Try to see your own life the emotional security got, the acceptance you got in your family, the complete safety of your family that has made you what you are today. That is why your psychology is so clear. Great achievers Indians have been great achievers wherever they have gone. You know the basis of that has been family stability and the basis of that is inviolate relationships that is why playing with relationships, it is very harmful in the long run. So, you must understand this is actually the fulcrum of your sensitivity and sanity to pay this respect to family relationships have committed relationships ah and inviolate emotional attitudes otherwise you know what happens at one point you will be at the mercy of a every transient impulse that arises in your mind because there is no lagam there is nothing to hold you back. So, do not ever reduce yourself to this level right. Now, when I said principles you must be highly principled, I mean this very clear about your emotional attitudes hm. This is the bedrock of your multi-dimensional development, please know this hm. The broad actually the expansive broad mind of a citizen comes when you are well established in this where there is basic family stability and you respect family values. So actually Ranganathananji Maharaj one of one very great monk of our order he used to say it is the social ideal of grihasta that grows into the national ideal of citizen. So, agar ye grihasta ashram hi theek na rahe which means no commitments in relationships, if that is shaken no other ashram can stand. That is why I am telling you it is so important to have committed relationships, it is so important to allow your energy to flow upward in a particular direction. So don't play with all this. This is not meant to be played with. There are certain areas of life you should not experiment with. Inviolate relationships is at the heart of a stable society. And family is the basic unit of society, isn't it? So abhi se yeh sab theek kar lo, no matter what surroundings you are in, what your friends say, you must be very principled about all this. Remember in our culture, duty has been placed above everything. You are, your duty as a student, tomorrow your duty towards your profession are your duty as a student tomorrow your duty towards your profession your duty towards your family this is paramount . This is the only way to evolve to grow up in life do you know to what an extent duty was considered paramount in our culture here I can tell you the example of this is an this is an extreme example of a Rajput princess. I do not know if you have heard of it Hadi Rani. These are all the unsung great heroes of Rajasthan is right here next to Delhi. She hailed from Rajasthan this princess. She was the princess of Boondi. There is a place called Boondi and she was actually married to Rao Ratan Singh. I have the details here. Yes he was also called Ravachudavat Rao Ratan Singh and she came to Mewad after her marriage and it so happened at that time the Maharana of Mewad had a battle with Aurangzeb because Aurangzeb had, uh, had his eye on Rani Prabhavati, I think of Roopnagar and, uh, this Maharana of Mewar went to her rescue. So there was a clash between Aurangzeb and Maharana of Mewar. And during that time, this Maharana requested Ratan Singh who was the husband of Hathirani to go and stop the Mughal forces. So a terrible battle would take place and this happened right on the night when Hathirani was married to Ratan Singh. So the call came for battle and this Ratan Singh who was also a young man at that time, very young, Hadi Rani was just a girl and so, Ratan Singh was very hesitant because if something happened to him, what would she do? In those days, women used to commit sati, hai na? So, he was very hesitant to go to this battle, but Hadi Rani pushed him. She forced him to take the army and go out for battle and she told him that this is how we have to defend the Rajput honor. You see what a great woman she said from my childhood my mother has taught me this that you must stand up for your honor for the dignity of the Rajput plan and you must even sacrifice your life if required for this because duty is above everything else just now your duty is to defend our kingdom and to obey Maharana of Mewar. So, go for battle and he went very hesitatingly, but then after sometime a maid came to Hadi Rani and said well ah Ratan Singh wants a memento before he goes for the battle and then Hadi Rani understood that he there is a certain level of resistance in him reluctance in him. So you know what she sent as a memento exactly she asked for a sword and then she told that maid to stand there and whatever she did, she said to my head should be carried to Ratan Singh. She just sliced her head with one stroke of the sword. She chopped off her head and the maid put that on the platter and covered it with a red cloth and took it to Ratan Singh. This was her memento to her husband and he didn't know what to expect and when he removed the cloth, he saw her head and he was not know what to expect and when he removed the cloth he saw her head and he was so shocked and shattered he tied that head it seems to his neck with the hair and when went and fought such a battle that Aurangzeb forces were rooted completely fiercely they fought and then they won the war, but he did not come back. Ratan Singh killed himself in the battlefield after he won the war. He just beheaded his head because he understood that such a great sacrifice on the part of this woman and he did not know what to make of it. So, he I think he is the only man who committed sati it inspired him so much her heroic act but you see it's an unimaginable act of sacrifice isn't it for a great ideal so that her husband goes to war and defends the kingdom so yes I say bohod saare stories hai humare culture mein duty is placed above everything You just imagine and see what this young girl has done There are so many unsung heroes like this So you see in our culture always that's why I told you Duty first and duty last Always think about this Your entire ethical understanding should be based on the idea of duty If you read Bhagavad Gita entire ethical understanding which should be based on the idea of duty Aap Bhagwat Gita padhoge, very intensely if you read you will see this is the idea which will come out In your particular station of life be true to it, do your duty what is required of you there that itself will take you forward, you don't have to think of anything else So remember this Next is you become the center of reliability for all people What is the meaning of this? Such a level of character that everybody knows how your responses and reactions are going to be So they give responsibility to you Do you understand this? In an organization this works so well. If people know you are your responses, your reliability, coefficient, if they know your behavior in every particular circumstance, they will depend upon you. If you are all the time whimsical or over emotional or given only to the opinions of others do you think anybody will rely on you? Small things are there but right now you must be so principled. So if you are principled you will be independent. If there are no principles you depend on majority opinion. Isn't it? It's so obvious. So along with your studies, your technical expertise, you must develop this character excellence just now and it will become part of your life. After many years, after this course is over, you should be able to come and tell me that what we picked up from here was useful to my life. This is what you should pick up mainly I want this, how you what credit you get is all secondary for me, but you must pick up these values, the inspiration of great lives that you should pick up um. Now, the next thing is yes you galvanize the world with the power of your character. Hamesha ye yaad rakna, I am telling you read success stories of great leaders and you will see this was a deciding factor at any given moment of time character is very high. If this is lacking you can only be a temporary leader at the most due to just your performance. So these are all part of your swadharma. Know this. This is part and parcel of your duty. Now and in the future. When I constantly talk of contribution, you see there is a way to contribute. This is also something I would like to cover in this session. How will you give? How will you contribute? If you are contributing monetarily, how will you give? In Taithi Upanishad, it is given with a beautiful feeling. Shraddhaya Deyam Ashraddhaya Deyam If you have to give, give with Shraddha. Don't flip the thing like this. Don't do it disrespectfully. You must give with full Shraddha. Hriya Deyam Shriyaadayam, Samvidadayam. Hriyadayam means give with modesty give Shriyadayam means give in plenty contribute according to your means and Samvidadayam give with knowledge Don't give blindly. So this is the method of contribution which they are talking of. Give with modesty. Contribute as much as you can. And with Shraddha and with knowledge. With faith. So then it becomes an act of worship literally. Isn't it? When you offer puja to God, how do you offer it? With what emotion do you offer it? Karma should be done with the same emotion. Isn't it? How modest you are, how restrained you are, controlled you are. Karma should be done with the same emotion. It's not that in the workplace you are an absolute dictator. But in the puja room you are different. this should go so these are the beautiful things you must develop here . Now I would also like to talk about one thing see Karma Yog it does not expect things from you which you cannot do . If you in the in in any particular context you see you put your concern for yourself in a in the larger public context, social context and you will be able to work efficiently. What this means is Bhagavad Gita which means in in political philosophy it is called enlightened self interest. You know you place your own interest in a larger context always it it works. Do not put I will give you an example for this. Let me give you the example first. It is from the life of the late Goan chief minister Manohar Parrikar. Aapne suna hai wo watermelon ka incident unke life mein? Bahut interesting hai. See he grew up in a village near Goa called Para. That's why they are called Parikars and Kyahua that that village was famous for watermelons. So, in this harvest season which is May month huge crop of watermelons used to come out every year. So, the farmer one farmer especially he took the lead and he used to arrange a watermelon eating competition for the children of the village. All the children had to come and eat as much watermelons as they want and he used to arrange a watermelon eating competition for the children of the village all the children had to come and eat as much watermelons as they want and he used to give huge ones, the best ones to the children and he also used to give them a cup in which they had to spit out the seeds now all these village children used to come including Manohar Parikar ji, wo bhi jaate the and all of them would sit and eat for hours they would eat watermelons and spit out the seeds in that cup. Now what he the farmer was actually doing was he was collecting seeds for the next crop by this is like a unpaid child labour you know, but at the same time benefiting the children of the village who are very happy for the watermelon they would wait for that watermelon eating competition . So, extracting those seeds he would use the those very seeds he would plant them again next year and would get in watermelons you know one generation is one year . So, next year again he would plant those same huge seeds which he got from the best watermelons and he would have a fantastic crop next year also. Like this it continued until Manohar Parrikar came to the age of when he went to IIT Mumbai for his training his education. Then he finishes education there after 7 years he went back to his village and suddenly he noticed watermelons have become so small in size. They are no more the watermelons which he used to gulp when he was a child. They have become small and they look so ah strange. He had never seen such small undeveloped watermelons. So, he went and asked the that farmer who used to conduct the competition what happened? It seems that farmers business had been taken over by his son, umar ke saath wo retire ho gaye the or his his son had taken up the business and this son thought why should I give my best watermelons to these children to eat? I will sell them for more money and I will give them the undeveloped small ones. So, that is what he did he would call the children and for the 7 years that is what he did he give gave them the undeveloped small watermelons. Now the seeds which came out of that were also the undeveloped seeds and he put them in the next year's crop. So, the watermelons started growing smaller and smaller in size every year by the end of the 7 year period they were small undeveloped ones and that is why the competition also stopped no more watermelon eating competition. So, what they are trying to tell us is then Manohar Parrikarji says there he said this in a speech in Gujarat he says that you see for watermelon crop one year is one generation, in the human being one generation is how many years? 25 years. If today we do not care take care of what education we are giving our children, it will take us 200 years to understand where we went wrong in educating our children, what we did not give them, why the watermelons became small, what seeds did they throw out. Today if we do not pay attention, aaj if you are not if you do not become idealistic and dutiful no matter what you have tomorrow, how bigger house you have, how many cars you have you will not bring happiness to yourself or to your society not to speak of the world at large. But, if today you develop some of these ideals and you will be not only able to contribute to your society, to your family, to the world at large but you will have deep satisfaction within yourself Parasparambhavayanta this is what it means it's mutual, growth is mutual always you have heard of mutual funds in banks always it is like that so remember give and take exchange is the law of life and if you don't put your contribution then it will not work so try to understand that's why paras param bhavayanta shreya paramavapsyata, Gita says. Then you will, shreyaskar hota hai wo. It's a mutual exchange of healthy things. For a society to grow, we need enlightened citizens. For enlightened citizens, there must be enlightened grihasthas, rishi-like people. And for that, you must have a base in all these values which we are discussing without that a society cannot grow don't think your idea of a great society today is what I know what do you call smart city? 5 GB connection 24 x 7 this is your idea of smart city just now but you must transcend this idea gradually what will you get by gradually. 5 GB network hone se aapko kya hoga? The content of what you take in to it through your senses is going to decide the quality of your mind. So refining that, refining every level of your system so that you get the best experiences of life. Experience comes from within, isn't it? Or just from outside? Outside things trigger your experience, but experience comes from within. So, the definition of a great city or smart city cannot be just a 5 GB network all the time. It should be something much much more than that. Vivekananda used to say that is a great society where the highest truths become practical, where the highest values have become practical. So aap hi soch lo, what kind of a tomorrow you want to create and give your children. Now with this example, we will just go into these slides and then I have a huge announcement to make for the practical part. I will go into that just let us dwell on a few verses from the Bhagavad Gita which will help you identify and stick to one's swadharma this is what it is speaking about you see the 18th chapter has this swe swe karmanya bhirata samsiddhim labhate narah swakarma nirata sidd Yatha Vindati Tatsrano means by doing our own karma samsiddhi can be beneficial this is what he is saying how it is possible he explains lord krishna explains just by doing your duty you can go to the highest so don't compartmentalize life 5 minutes for yoga the rest of the time working feverishly and angrily. Then going out for a walk, going out for sports, compartmentalizing your whole life. No, anything you do should become yoga. This is the ideal and you must work towards it. Anything I do, I will do with a state of mind which will usher in the yogic state of mind then yata pravrttir bhutanam yena sarvam idam tatam svakarmanatam abhyarcha siddhim vindati manavah jisse jinse pravrtti aati hai bhutanam bhuto me which means that which is the starting point of creation starting point of pravrtti in creation he who pervades everything how do you worship him you worship him through your work Siddhim and this in the in this way Siddhim Vindati Manava. This way a man attains to the highest spirituality, he is saying. So, that is why worshipping God, don't think it is just offering sun, offering prasad. This is worship. See, your idea of worship of the divine should change with Karma Yoga. His worship is your action is worship because your life energy is nothing but his expression. He is working through your instrumentation what you are calling I. Think about it a little bit and see what I means. Is it just body and mind? That's the instrument through which you are working and that belongs to him. So you are offering to him what is already his. That is why every work you do is should actually be worship and it is not some special thing which alone is worship some special ritual alone is worship every work can be done as worship it can elevate you. This is the message of the Bhagavad Gita then he says Shreyan Swadharmo Viguna Paradharmasvanushtitat Swabhavan Iyatam Karma Kurvannapnoti Kilvisham better is one's own duty though devoid of merit than the duty of another well performed for performing duty ordained by his own nature man incurs no sin think about this and see your own nature you see I told you your brilliant intellect has brought you here today so your duties will be in a way fixed a set of duties will be fixed you must be true to them this is what is expected of you. Apne swadharma ke prati nishtha then then there is one more verse which is not given there. Sahajam karma kaunteya sadosham api nathya jeth. He says sarvarambhahi doshena dhume nagnirivavrata. Iska matlabhe every work it will have a mixture of results. Just like how you see there will be a measure of good and evil in every work just like how he says fire covered by smoke. Know that all undertakings are beset by some evil as is fired covered by smoke. So, that does not mean you run away from that work. You must do it to the best of your ability with the best of intentions and convert it into a yog. So, these are all actually he is giving principles for leadership whenever problems descend upon you in your workplace . If you say this will be the result no if it is your duty you should do it and the results will take care of themselves . So, all undertakings have can have mixed results, but you must do what is your duty at a given moment. Please remember this you must do your duty no matter what in any given situation of life and the best results will come out of it if you have been dutiful hm. So, you see the highest honors of any nation of any democracy will be for the most dutiful. Isn't it? Who do we give Param Vir Chakra to? Where duty has been above everything else. That is the most honorable position for a man. So develop this. We will end the session here for today.
 Music Today's session we are going to study the theory of ethics, which is important for you to judge your actions, to know the right and wrong of an action. Do you know the definition of ethics? Ethics is the study of the criterion of morality, a study of the standard of morality. So because moral standards differ from culture to culture, is there a universal standard? This is what ethics is going to study, this is what ethics is going to tell us today. So we will be studying the theories of ethics briefly we will be studying and as it applies to our purposes, Karma Yoga. So let me first give you a summary of what ethical theories are about. Broadly speaking, there are two types of ethical theories. One is called the consequentialist theory, other one is the non consequentialist theory. Consequence means you know the meaning, is not it? What is the consequence of something, the end of something, the final effect of something? So consequentialist theories are those which tell you the ethics is based on the consequence or the end to be achieved by the action. If the end is good, if it is useful to humankind, if it is ah giving you happiness, well being, pleasure, then the action is justified. This is what the consequential theories will tell you ok. So, it depends on the end to be achieved. So, usually the end is taken to be happiness, utility, pleasure, these are the ends. So, accordingly you have consequentialist theories and these theories you will find everywhere in every culture and even in Indian culture you know Charvak philosophy was based on this kind that that the end justifies the means. If the end is acceptable enough then the means any means is alright. You know there was this famous saying with the Charvaks Yaavad Jeeveth Sukham Jeeveth Rinnam Krithva Gritham Pibeth. You have heard of it? This is the philosophy of materialists. Live well, even if you have to go into debt, but you must have ghee, that is the meaning. So the end justifies the means in these theories. And then the second type of theory, ethical theory is non-consequentialist theory, which means no, the end should not justify the means the consequence should not matter it is duty which matters. Ethics based on duty fulfilled by the action is non consequentialist theory. Now you pay a little attention to this and see what they are trying to mean by that. You see we have a feeling of ought to I ought to do this, this ought to be done, this is something which I cannot let go. We have this kind of a moral obligation within us which always directs us to something which we feel we have to do. When there is a wrong action something within us tells us no you you cannot do this, is it a popularly call it the conscience, but this ought to feeling is very strong in human beings. And this is what Kant called the ah categorical imperative, inner categorical imperative which means there is an inner command which tells me what I ought to do, what I ought not to do. So, this is an ethical system based on this, are you getting the point? So, it is duty based, not consequence, not end based, not the result based. Now, many of the popular theories of ethics are non consequentialist. It depends on your duty, what the the action you are going to generate is going to depend on your duty, the rightness or wrongness of that action. You see for a soldier killing is a right action, killing as such violence may be wrong, but for a soldier that is his duty, so the action is justified. So this this kind of a theory is this is called deontological theory. Even in the Bhagavad Gita, the Arjun is a warrior and he is being urged to fight, is not it? Why is he being urged to fight? Because his dharma is that of a soldier, of a warrior, he has to protect the people. So, the action is justified, which means action based on duty is what is seen in this branch of ethics, it is not based on consequence, it is not consequential. So many of the philosophers even Yog Vedanta thinkers like Prabhakara all of them subscribe to this deontological view, theory of ethics. Aap soch ke dekho bahut interesting hai. If you actually think what they are trying to say it is very interesting. How do you judge the rightness or wrongness of an action? The third group of theories are called virtue ethics which means it is based on the character of persons or the ethos of a particular community. And virtue ethics popularly you can say like at the time of the Smritis, Ram Rajya was a was a great thing, isn't it? A certain set of virtues which characterize the Ram Rajya. It is based on the virtue of a particular person, the ethos of a particular that Suryavamsi family. Hai na? Aapne suna hoga ye. Toh wo kya kehate the, their famous unka nara motto was, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, their famous, value ethics, I mean virtue ethics. These virtues are sort of part and parcel of either the person or the community. So, they may be just ethnic, they may be part of a nation of a nation state, but these virtue ethics everything falls into this, it is based on virtue. Now for each of these theories you know there are for and against views. Let me show it to you on a slide. You see these are the popular traditional ethical theories consequentialist, non consequentialist just now I explained to you consequentialist theories are based on utility so utilitarianism it just ego it can be based on and hedonism pleasure does it get you all of this then well the action is justified. So, the consequence is what decides the goodness rightness or wrongness of an action. Nonconsequentialist theories are deontology and the agents virtue. Now just go through what I have put underneath consequentialist theories are those based on consequences of an action. They are also called teleological theories. Here the standard of morality is determined by the end which may which may be just pleasure or happiness or utility. Non-consequentialist theories are based on the sense of moral obligation or duty. Here the standard of morality is based on duty moral obligation in any particular context or that inner categorical imperative which I told you. Many of many ethical theories fall under this second group deontological theories they are called. Then let me give you a summary of the four types of ethical theories. Just watch this slide. Consequence based, what are the advantages of this? It stresses promotion of happiness and utility. It ignores concerns of justice for the minority population. Not just that, if you say the end justifies the means, then the means can be anything. So, the rightness or wrongness of the means also comes into consideration. That is why many popular theories do not fall under this group. Duty based theories that is ontological deontological theories, the advantages are it stresses the role of duty and respect for persons. Disadvantages is underestimates the importance of happiness and social utility. This is the popular notion but ultimately you will see deontological theories have a very very solid stand. Kyuki whatever is duty based is always more reliable is not it or is it just pleasure based. Hamara hamara jo shreyas prayas distinction we made in one of the classes. Shreyas is what is it based upon? Duty and the goodness it brings into your life, long term satisfaction it brings, while prayas is based upon just short term satisfaction or pleasure. So understand deontological theories are important. Then this is contract based theory is another type of theory, it provides a motivation for morality but offers a minimum morality that is the problem. Because it is contract based rights, right based and then there is character based or what are called virtue ethics which we discussed just now. Stresses moral development and value and moral education and depends on the homogeneous standards of morality of a community, community standards for morality, a person or a community. So these are broadly the types of ethical theories available to us. Now as I told you each one has its advantages disadvantages for against views opposition contradiction all this is there. But further on I would like to point out the the justification problem what justifies a particular theory. See some idea you must have of all of this it is called a meta ethical problem, which means each theory how does it justify itself. Look at the deontological theory here, there is the question of how to justify its claims that certain moral rules are the correct ones. When you say it is duty based, how do you know what should be my duty, what I have chosen is my duty, what should be our concept of duty, hm it is based on that. Then utilitarianism or what what was called consequentialist theory, how to justify its claim that the only thing that really matters morally is consequences for happiness or well being, again that happiness range it stretches from what to what, is it just what gives me pleasure, should I go in for that or what gives pleasure to others or what gives what is purely utilitarian in value what should you be based upon. So, this is another justification problem for consequentialist theories. And virtue ethics are of course, the problem concerns the question of which character traits are called virtues, they differ from culture to culture. So, you see everywhere there is a metaethical problem. Now how will you decide the rightness or wrongness of an action, besides this there are very many more systems, I am just giving you an overview. There is a system called care ethics, you see care ethics this is what it believes in. Rather than the starting point being rationally derived universal principles, ethics starts in caring relationships, it believes in that. Love, care, service, this should be the ethical standard, that is what they believe. Care ethics is the narrative of relationships that extend through time. If your morals are motivated by impersonal rules rather than personal affection then you are morally impaired they say. Feelings are the foundation and motivation for ethical behavior, they are not saying if it feels good do it, but feelings are not to be followed blindly. So, there is an opposition towards this also. Take the last stand you see feelings must be schooled, developed and examined before we use them as the basis of moral behavior. Shaping the right sorts of feelings is a difficult demanding process. So, this form of ethic also has its own conditions. You know can you trust all of your feelings? You cannot trust all of your feelings. So, certain level of discipline is required even in this form of ethics. Finally you see, the world is comprised of relationships. So, viewing the moral world as a network and self is defined through that connection. So, morality and responsibility, responsibility involves restoring community where wherever it is broken. So, this type of ethics believes in connecting with others, connecting through service, through love, through relationships and the ethics works like this only. One who cannot connect is unethical according to this view. So, like this there are a number of theories of ethics. So, let us just keep ourselves to this for now. And once you have got an overview of ethics, now you must see for yourself in in my life in judging my actions, what is the type of theory which most applies to me. Now, see for people like I told you Charvax purely material materialist, they will say well obviously, happiness is the standard, pleasure is the standard, whatever gives me immediate pleasure should be the standard. So, then it naturally comes to consequentialist theory right. And there are people who will tell you there are systems of thought philosophers, there are cultures which will tell you no duties is above everything else whether there is happiness or not in that duty whether there is pleasure or not whether there is utility or not duty is above everything. Hain na Bhagwat Geeta ka message kya hai mainly karmand neva adhikar aste ma phaleshu kadach na. mainly karman neva adhikaraste ma phaleshu kadachana. The angel does not justify the means it should be duty based every action. So, that is the deontological stand. So, you take any kind of theory it will fall under this these slots. Now, we have to decide what what to take up, but before we go into that in our our everyday life and experience before we decide which action is right or wrong good or bad we will go a little into the scriptures. Because what do the scriptures give us general principles of morality is not it general standards of morality. So, they give us very solid ground for ethics, studying ethics and that is why we will go a little bit into our scriptures to see what is it that they are prescribing, which of the theories to follow, which theory is valid, in our case which theory to use. Now, for that first let me go into the Vedas. In the Taithira Upanishad, there is a convocatory address which the guru is giving the disciples. When they are returning home, the students are returning home after completing their education, the guru gives them a set of instructions in which he is telling them what they ought to do what they should not do. They are prescriptive in nature you can say but very clearly defined ethics are there. You must have heard of it Satyam Vada Dharmam Chara Swadhyayana Maa Pramadaha Maatru Devo Bhava Pitru Devo Bhava Acharya Devo Bhava Tithi Devo Bhava so many such instructions are there speak the truth and walk the path of righteousness do not ignore your studies do not ignore learning do not ignore any of this, neither truth nor righteousness nor cushion your welfare, put your mind into things which will build your life. And again he the guru also tells the disciples follow those actions which are ideal in us and the rest of the actions judge for yourself. So they are not just prescriptions actually, he is asking the students to determine for themselves what is the right thing to do. So you see he is pointing to certain definite ways of thinking, ways of judging and judging the goodness of an action, the rightness or wrongness of an action and this was something you know how the Vedas were transmitted, the very word for Vedas is Shruti, which means they were transmitted by hearing from teacher to student, teacher to student, through hearing. Those days there was no writing or such or just something on box of trees, but mainly they were transmitted by word of mouth, by hearing. So the disciple again transmits it to his disciple. This is how we have collected the entire Vedas right from the beginning. So these are the things which Taithirya Upanishad, this kind of ethical theory is being given out to us. Another hymn is there in the Rig Veda, Sangacchadvam Sambhadvam, you must have heard of it. You see it tells you if I go into the Sanskrit you must know it in English, then you will be able to understand. Let us walk together, let us speak in harmony, let our minds apprehend alike, common be the end of your assembly, united be your thoughts, united be your hearts, let us be perfect in our unity. So, what are they trying to tell us through all this? Be united, be of one will, one mind and you will be successful collectively. So, you see they are pointing out to coordination, they are pointing to team, team spirit, team effort, collective effort. So many such things are there in the Vedas, right from the Vedas. How we should conduct ourselves, on an everyday basis what should be the priorities in our life, how should our thinking be and what is it that is to be sought in life? By knowing these things, what kind of actions are required in order to gain these things? One more thing which I would like to point out here is, you see, every philosophical system gives its own ethical code, like in the Purva Mimamsa also, you find ordinances or commands based on Vedic injunctions. So again they are of this type, the same type which we discussed so far. Then you have the yoga system, in yoga you know Ashtang Yoga, you have heard of it, what are the first two steps of Ashtang Yoga pehle do kadam kya hai Ashtang Yoga ke? Yam or Niyam, they are entirely ethical disciplines. Without that, without that base, nobody can proceed to Ashtang Yoga towards the higher steps because you know basically what is required to keep mental equilibrium is moral disciplines. Without these disciplines the mind cannot be in control. If you ask a yogi why why should I be ah ethical at all, he will say that is the only way to control your mind and that is why moral discipline is required. Otherwise the mind will function in such a way you will be frightened of it yourself. So, that is why the basic moral disciplines are required. Aap ye samajh rahe ho ye theories kyu important hai aapke liye. You must have a hold over this knowledge for you to understand yourself so that when you are into action you will pause and think in the middle of your actions. Ye kya main kar sakta hoon? Ye karna kya yogiye hai iss situation mein, is this my duty or not, should I go this far or not, should I do this or not, unless you ponder over these questions, tomorrow you will be great decision makers for our nation and for the world. Unless you learn to pause and ponder before you take an action, your action nobody can tell whether your action will be right or wrong. Dynamism ka matlab ye nahi hai ki hum plunge kare action mein. You know really dynamic people within themselves they are very balanced. Definite energy is flowing in a definite direction that is why it gets its force towards dynamicity. Within themselves they are very organized. So, it is very clear in their mind what they should do, how much they should do, what time they should do it and what is required in that particular context. So, that is why we are telling you something about ethical theories. A leader means basically this, he is ethical to the core, every action of his will come only after passing through the filter of this kind of a mind, ethical mind. Otherwise simply a kind of impulsiveness, that way you cannot be a leader. You understand your inner being should be well organized and that is why you should know something of this ethics. See in the in the yoga system it is so clear. Let me give you some samples. Jo maine kaha yam and niyam disciplines. Aapko pata hai what falls under yam? What are the disciplines that fall under yam? Ahimsa, I do not have to translate you know what it is, Satya, Ahimsa is non-violence, Satya is truth, then you have Aasthaya which means non-stealing, we may not go out and steal others, but stealing copyright in so many ways, stealing can be done. So, avoiding all of that. Then Brahmacharya, a certain purity of body and mind. And then Aparigraha, non-acceptance of gifts. Yeh kyun kehte hai? You know you get obligated, you get a feeling of obligation for the person whose gift you take, is not it? So, in order to remove that, so that you you remain free and independent, a parigraha is practiced. You will take only what is required and you will return back if you take. Isire to yagna principle hai. So, you see these are basic disciplines. If the mind functions like this at any given point it will remain clear for you to make your decisions. See if it is if it does not follow satya, how will the mind behave tell me, you just let anything out of your mouth and the mind will pass it, because it is not committed to satya. Gradually you lose the distinction between what is true and what is untrue. If this happens you cannot be a leader, nobody will follow you. A leader means somebody who who is absolute about what he says 100 percent true, he believes it himself first absolutely. So, you see these simple disciplines mean a lot. They make it very clear in Yog Sutras that if you are not established in this, you cannot take the next step. You cannot do pranayam, you cannot do pratyahar, dharana, dhyan, samadhi, yes later on. Pehle inme pratishthit hona hai yam aur niyam mein. Then niyam disciplines you see, first is shoucha, again cleanliness and then santosha contentment always in restless mode, excitability mode, not like that, a contented mind is required is not it for any great pursuit. Then tapas, austerity ye cheez lani hai thodi jeevan mein. What does tapasya do? Tell me. Hum nahi keh rahe hain aap jangal mein chale jao tapasya karne ke liye. Yehi pe in IIT you can do wonderful tapasya. How? Concentration of mind on what you want to achieve is tapasya. Tap dhatu ka matlabhi hai to generate heat, a intense concentration does this for you, so yahi pe jo tapasya karne, yahi jaha aap ho, vahi pe karna hai, you must get rid of the idea, yoga is to be done in mountain caves or some ashram, your workplace is your yog kshetra, you must convert whatever comes to you into yoga. Yahi aap kar sakte ho. Isliye try for it. Tapasya is one thing and then swadhyay, good reading everyday, scriptural reading. Yeh karte ho aapko to samayi nahi milta hoga but you must try to do this. Every day 5-10 minutes of good reading you can do. Isse kya hota hai? The mind gets a good direction you know. Instead of simply seeing something or going to YouTube and seeing something, get rid of these habits and every day just follow these simple disciplines which they are giving you. Some level of scriptural reading will help you a lot, ek direction deta hai life ko. Once I told you read the lives of great people, there is no inspiration, it is a living inspiration. Then finally, is Eswar pranidhan, which means surrender to God, a feeling of surrender to the divine, if this is not there, no only egoism will persist, me and mine that is all, that is the world, no only egoism will persist. Me and mine, that is all, that is the world, not at all. So, a disposition of surrender towards the divine. So, these are the basic disciplines which are or they make it very clear, these are not disciplines meant only for yogis or meant only for people who are given to spiritual practice or to some ethnic community. These are Sarvabhauma Mahavratam which means universal great woes which everybody has to follow if you want to be successful in life. Dekhi simple disciplines hai but what do they do? They recharge your energies, they freshen your mind and they will give you an inclination towards sustained concentration and success will follow. So these are the simple ethical excellencies you can say in yoga. Next we have in the Bhagavad Gita, so Bhagavad Gita as I told you is it is very clear, again and again Arjun is sort of told he has to get rid of his mental fever. What is the nature of that fever you know? Vigata jvaraha word is used. The fever is delusion, moha, inability to understand his duty at that moment of time. What was Arjun's argument Bhagwat Gita me apne padha hoga? Kya hai argument? Very rational argument he is giving. How can I kill my kitten kin? I do not want the kingdom. Isiliye Arjun ka Vishad bhi ek yog ban jata hai. Vishad bhi yog ban sakta hai you see. Arjun Vishad yog it is called first chapter. So so sincerely he felt I cannot do this. I do not want anything out of it. How can I kill my own people? So the Bhagavad Gita worked on him. The thing never came in Duryodhana's mind you see or in anybody else's mind. So the thing is this sincerity, this seriousness should come into our life that is why then the you can absorb the Bhagavad Gita. The simple command given there is you stand up to your duty. What is your duty to your what pertains to your station of life you do that without thinking of the results and that duty itself will take you to the highest. So, if your duty just now is to kill whoever is in front of you does not matter what relationship he is in whoever is in front of you he becomes your enemy because you are a Kshatriya your duty is that of a soldier and this is a dharma yudh, you are fighting for a cause and the cause is very noble. So direct your energies towards your duty. This is the message of the Bhagavad Gita. Bhagavad Gita say you can draw everything. In fact, that is why it is called the essence of the Upanishads. Bhagavad Gita is called the essence of the Upanishads. Upanishads kya hai? Vedon ka saar hai. Vedon ka saar hai, Vedanta Upanishad, Upanishad ka saar hai Bhagavad Gita. It is the very essence of the Upanishads and it is giving you the all important nature of duty in life. Whatever you identify with that generates your duty. Only the yogi who can remain completely unidentified has no duties, but as long as you are identified first with your body and mind, then with others, with your job, with your affections, with your relationships, with your family that brings a lot of duties on onto you. Fulfill those duties and you will move forward. You will also be successful here, but if you identify and yet do not fulfill the duty, then you cannot progress that way, this is what he is saying. So you can take the entire ethical system of the Bhagavad Gita, very inspirational literature it is, kisi samay padle na Bhagavad Gita. Then there is of course, the approach of Vedanta to ethics, you know what actually Vedantic ethics is based upon, it is based upon the Vedantic vision of unity, unity of all existence. Is there a kind of all pervading unity in all existence? You see when you sit calmly during a sunset or a sunrise and your entire mind has become calm you feel a sense of unity in creation, is not it, in existence. What they are trying to tell you is this is not just poetry. Poets may be inspired to visualize that you unity and actually you can deduce a kind of unity through science, but what actually helps you experience that unity is the practice of yog. what actually helps you experience that unity is the practice of yoga. You can experience a kind of unity, the unity is in awareness. As bodies we are all different, as minds we are different, but there is a unity when it comes to pure awareness and it is based on this unity that there is ethics because Vedanta will tell you if we are one on the plane of consciousness then what do you become you are nothing but me in another form with another name I am you in another form with another name. So that is why I should be good to you that is why you should be good to you, that is why you should be good to me, it is not a matter of I ought to be, this is the very nature of things, if you harm somebody naturally you are harming yourself, if you do good to somebody naturally you are doing good to yourself. Vivekananda used to say the universal oneness of the soul is the eternal sanction of all morality because the soul there is only one consciousness manifesting through different bodies and minds. That is why ethics you know that is why we should say what can I do for you that is why service because essentially this is the element. There is only oneness in the existence, appearance there is an appearance of many, the heart of things is oneness. So Vedantic ethics if you can call it, it is based on this ontology of the self, the reality of the self. Now for our purposes we will bring all this in a format which we can use. Dekhe, all this entire ethical theory which we have been studied and the scriptural version of ethics which we have been studied, let us now put it into points which we can use. First of all, when we judge an action, bahut baar aapke jeevan mein ye aayega, should I do this or should I not do it. One group of people will tell you do it, another group of people are telling you do not do it. How will you decide? You must see whether the action is Shreyaskar or Prayaskar, long term satisfaction or short term pleasure. Make it independent of majority opinion, you understand it should be your own thinking a leader means this relies only on himself first does not majority opinion accordingly I will move a leader cannot do that otherwise you cannot be a leader outstanding leaders rely on their their intellect. So, pehle kya sochna hai what will will this action do? Will it, yeh shreyaskar hai ya prayaskar hai? Will it bring good or is it just bringing me pleasure? Take your own life situation and see. When there is an exam in front of you, what is the shreyaskar thing to do? To avoid distraction and apply yourself to studies, no matter what your friends say, what peer pressure is there, no matter what is around you, is not it? So, yeh pehla principle hai, which you can draw, I will focus only on that which brings me long term satisfaction and goodness, commit yourself to this. After this you must understand the means is very important as importance as the end. See the the first theory consequentialist theory told you do not bother about the means if the end is a pleasure or utility then go ahead, not so. The means also is important if the means is wrong, your action will be brought under question, means is as important as the end. In fact, while working you are supposed to focus only on the means and the end will come by itself. But agar sirf you know like daydreaming, bed ke sochte raho ki at the end this will happen, that will happen, I will get this, you you would not get anything, you must perfect the means in your hand is the means, aap agar theek tarah se with concentration padhoge, the result is going to come by itself. But if you only keep imagining the result, phir mujhe yaha placement milega, is company mein job milega, six figure salary milegi, then I will go in a Mercedes, if you keep daydreaming simply, you are only focusing on the end, you have let go on the means, you will not get anything. So, give as much importance to the means as to the end and at the time of performing the action the means is all important. You see the lives of leaders, you will see this. They are so serious when they are working. This is very important point. Vivekananda yeh bar bar kehate the. He said, I learnt this from a great yogi, pay as much attention to the means as to the end. This is a very important point. The next thing which you should know is, you must understand the seriousness about karma. I told you there are three effects of karma. Third effect, what is the third effect? Do you remember? The cosmic effect, that whatever you have put into whatever force you have released that is going to come back to you in some way what you saw that you are going to reap take this law very seriously do not think wow but you only said that causality is a relative thing no no no causality is not relative as long as you are identified with body and mind. This law is of something very firm something established. So, what what does this law basically tell you? It is tracing cause effect relationship. If you have a bad effect just now that means, you have released a bad cause, change the cause. If the effect is good, it means the cause has been good, which means what? If you are continuously radiating goodness, help, service, love, whatever is required for your goals, concentration, sincerity, honesty at work, the fruit of that is going to come back to you. You do not have to worry so much about the fruit. Agar this all this you have not observed and you are only imagining that well what I want will come to me, that is not going to come. So, take this third law quite seriously. Bahut baar students ask, you see people who are so worthless, they do so well in life sometimes unke jeevan mein bahut kuch aata hai or we people who struggle so much and then we are not able to, see it depends on that third law, you know at some point of time you have shown something which has not, which is not working that is why. Now you can change the whole thing through your will, through your choices, you have in you the ability to make the change to reverse any situation through your will, we have discussed this earlier. So understand that the this cosmic effect is inevitable, inscrutable in a way, but inevitable and that is why you must make sure on an everyday basis you radiate the right things, the right bhav, the right thoughts, good emotions and develop life skills which will make you a natural leader. You understand Yog Vedanta how much you will absorb I do not know, but basic life skills, truthfulness, honesty all that we have been discussing, this is very important for success in life. Just like that success does not come that inner integrity should be there and people should find you perpetually reliable, then you will be a natural leader. So take take this law seriously. Suppose somebody has a very negative karmic account, you know, no, you can atone for it. You can, prayaschit jo bolte hai na, prayaschit ka kya matlab hai, purvachit ko lana, suppose you have done a wrong action, maybe you shouted at your mother, it was not some impulse came up and you shouted at your mother, baadme aapko bohot bura laga, you can do some form of prayaschit, you go and say sorry, you go and do some service for her, purvachit ko wapas lana hai, usi ko prayaschit kehte hai, bring the good power back. So you can, what I am trying to tell you is what force you put into motion, you can work on that force, suppose it is not good enough and you can bring it back. So a sunny disposition which will bring positivity into the atmosphere, this ensures your success. Kai kai log hota hai, they are go getters, very selfish. Do not think a leader by being like that you cannot be a leader. If you become a leader at at all by chance, you will only end up being a kind of a boss who is who does not get along well with his employees. It is only through character and work efficiency that you can be a real leader one who is accepted by one and all hm. So, these small things you must make it part of your life now. Then the in all ethical things you know there is this big problem of sin. How does how does all our scriptures view sin do you know? There is no concept of sin in Vedanta or Yog. Only divinity is there in man, man has original divinity and advantageous sin, it is superficial the outer crust if you do a wrong action this is what they say. What happens is wrong action or what they say, yagna I already told you the meaning of yagna taking more from life than you deserve is sin. In the Bhagavad Gita you will find this statement made one who eats and does not feed others is a sin is a thief. If you are not contributing to universal life, but only taking from it, gradually you go enter sin, this is the concept of sin. So how do you overcome this? By connecting with universal life, by contributing as much as you can. Never think that what little contributions we make oh it is a feel good experience I stand on a high pedestal and say I did this I did this compared to what you have taken from life try to think about it and see there is one very beautiful story in the Mahabharata, let me tell that here, what Yajna actually means. Dekhi yeh story hai ek mongoose ki. I do not know if you have read in your childhood. This is this was a popular story once. This it so happened that in a village, no actually this mongoose first comes to the place where the Pandavas are conducting a huge sacrifice. So he comes there at the moment of the sacrifice and he sees the number of gifts that are being given, the gold, the silver, the chariots, the horses and kings and beggars and everyone is being fed, so many gifts are being given, everyone is happy, everyone is very pleased with the sacrifice, huge sacrifice, all this is going on. And suddenly this mongoose, they notice this mongoose who has half of his body golden and the other half is just like ordinary grey colour. And then they ask him, how come sir you are here? And the mongoose says, well this is no sacrifice, I just came to see, but I do not see this as a great sacrifice. Then they say this is the biggest sacrifice in India in Bharat Varsh of that time. It is a huge Rajasiv Yajna and so many lakhs and lakhs of people are benefited by this, poor people are being fed day and night, but you say it is no sacrifice, he says no. Then why do you say this? Then he tells his story, he says you see sometime back I was in I went to a village, I entered a village and in that place at that time there was a famine a 3 year famine raging. So, everybody was starving and a number of people were actually they had been killed by the famine and I entered a particular home which had the the father and mother, the son was there and the son's wife was there daughter in law was there. So, this small household I entered I saw that that day only these people of 4 people also were starving and they were reduced to skin and bones and then I saw ahh suddenly a guest came into one day the brahmin somehow got a little barley floor out of begging just by chance every day he would not get it but he got that and they roasted that barley and divided it to 4 portions and as they just sat down to eat a guest knocked at the door and this man said I am dying of hunger in this village there is no and in those times you know this was the norm any guest coming in he should be served first. So these people they welcome the guest they made him sit and the eldest of the family the father he offered his portion of that barley flour to him. Now that man was so hungry he just gulped it down and he said this is an appetizer, now I am all the more hungry, so please give me something more, so then his wife also gave her portion, said I am hungry, so the son gave his portion because he said well my father's dharma is my dharma, if my father has given I should also give and then his wife gave her portion also because she said my husband's dharma is my dharma, so I should also give and then his wife gave her portion also because she said my husband's dharma is my dharma so I will also give and the guest took all of that and that night the guest rested but these four people died. This mongose is telling this story in the yajna to the Pandavas. Then the Mongoose said, there was during that time a little barley floor had fallen on the ground, I rolled in that floor and one half of my body became golden and then since then then I came out of the house I understood these four people have died I did not stay there but since then I have been searching for another such great sacrifice from which my other half body also will become golden but I have not found I came to your yajna and I thought here at least it will become, but it has not become because they sacrifice to the point of their lives. So, this is the story of the golden mongoose which means what sacrifice has been held as the law of life. It is a matter of choice you can do or not. You have taken from life, you have to replenish, you have to give back into that cycle, you see in nature everything is cyclic, you study on a Kreb cycle, nitrogen cycle, carbon cycle, is not everything in a cyclic form, is anything just tangential, radial, it is all cyclic, which means what? Nature itself functions like this, what you take, you have to return back, because the trees are doing what they are doing, we are able to breathe, is not it? Everything in nature is like this, so if I hold back and say no, yeh mera prapya hai, main kisi ko nahi doong say no I become a thief. So, understand this is the general nature of life what they are calling yagna they are only doing it to reinforce the idea of give and take in our life because I am taking I have to give hm . So, this is the concept of sin in Hindu ethics . Then let me go to the next point see I told you our scriptures had duty to be above everything. Today there is something called an ethical hacker, ethical hacking is it is actually you can earn lakhs by being an ethical hacker. For those of you who like to crack passwords and the social networking sites of your friends ah and who are good at coding and in programming languages, you can take up this job because huge companies some some are laughing instead of doing it to your friends sides you can put your brain cells to good use by becoming an ethical hacker. Huge companies are wanting ethical hackers for security purposes. So, you see hacking is very bad, but ethical hacking you are doing it in order to provide security to the company companies accounts. So, you are getting paid for it. What I am telling you is more than the job you do the intent behind the job decides the rightness or wrongness of an action. If the intention is pure, intention is good, you know the the work you are doing if it is going to benefit a great many people, the action is justified. This is the message you must catch from all these ethical theories. Isiliya kehte hai hai duty is above everything else. The duty of a ethical hacker is to hack and that is justified. Duty rises above everything else. In any given context situation you must think what is the right duty for me in this context, what I ought to do in this context, not what will I get out of it. If you start thinking what will I get out of it, well, your action will not be right. Please see this, ap apne hi context mein jab hamara practicals hota hai na, we can put this to practical test and see. We will try to arrange the practical like that. Any given situation you must pause and think is this the right duty in this context, then you will see your action is there is no tinge in that action, it is perfect. Then one more point which I would like to give you here is what is it that fulfills a law? See I have been telling you a number of laws. Remember love fulfills every law not that the law is final. There is something about law. You look at your mothers in your home. Do they ever tell you how much Karma Yoga we are doing? Does your mother ever say, I did this and this for you right from morning? Her fulfillment is in doing things for you because she looks upon you as an extension of herself Right? In a mother's eyes, the child is an extension of herself So, she is doing it for herself, she feels it like that. Isliye wo kabhi claim nahi karti, maine aapke liye yeh yeh kiya hai. Koi maa aisa nahi kahegi. So that is why love fulfills the law. Wherever there is a law, there is something above that. If you can develop, Vivekananda yeh kehate the, duty is seldom sweet. You must be dutiful so long we have been discussing deontological ethics, you must be dutiful but there is something about duty if you add love, you are like adding oil to the wheels you know, you are lubricating the wheels, all the more easy it will be for you to work for others you must be able to do this a loving attitude of service and you can do everything whether you know ethical theories or not this attitude itself will fulfill the law of karma. Bahut sundar sundar ghatna hai see your mother I as I told you she is a piety tasker in so many ways without laying any claim to Karma Yoga. The classic example right in front of your eyes I remember one story you know ahh it is the story of a monk who was climbing up a hill in the Himalayas he was climbing up a hill and he saw one pahadi boy one one boy from the hills, he was also climbing up but with a little bundle on his back, that boy was very small, 5 years or something like that and huffing and puffing up and that bundle on his back had a tuft of hair which means that was a baby. His mother had tied his little sister 2 years old or something to his back because pahado mein wo karte hai, if she gave it in his hands he may drop her. So, they she had tied it to his back the baby and this boy was with great strain he was climbing up the same slope of the hill. So, as soon as this monk saw this he understood that the little baby is on the back and this fellow is struggling. So he went close to the child and said, can I carry your little burden for you? Immediately the boy said, burden? How dare you? She is my sister. See what I am trying to tell you is, if this kind of a, where love comes in, you are prepared to carry any burden. It does not appear, in fact, it is an insult to call it a burden, is not it? You see, I know sadhus like this. If you show that least sympathy for the great hard work they are doing, they will feel insulted by it. Itni nobility hai unme. Kyunki they consider it, it has to be done. It is an expression of my love. Aap agar aapki mummy ko kahoge ki maa itna mat karna, aapki mummy ko ghusa aayega. Hai na? She has to do it because that is the way to for her to fulfil her motherhood. So, love fulfills every law, please see this, there is something far above duty, if you want your duty to fulfill you, if you want your actions to bring this blessing into your life, you must add the power of love. This is the final thing we should know about action. Action sirf karma theory, it is not just karma theory. Action should be spontaneous. I told you the more you work, the more it should fulfill you. If it is not giving you that inner joy, that inner satisfaction, there is something wrong in our karma yoga. Every action is a event for fulfillment, it should give satisfaction. Isile yeh koi willful something which you are doing out of a good compulsion, it is nothing like that, it is a spontaneous act of service. And so, if you add in a loving philosophy, whatever you may say, just add in a little bit of love and duty is very sweet. So with this we come to an end of the theory of ethics, which is important for us to judge actions. Now we will go into one point about causation which we have missed out, but which is important for you to know. See Vivekananda used to always say he used to give a illustration, you you just think of a huge locomotive moving along along along rails and it is a it is emblematic of engineering ingenuity and power, is not it? And consider before that huge mighty locomotive a bullet train let us say, going at such enormous speeds and in front of that is a little worm. Now who do you think has more power? You say bullet train, hm, but you know that bullet train can only go along the tracks, this worm can decide whether it wants to be on the track or outside. This worm can move according to its choice, its will because it is a self-aware entity while your bullet train cannot do that. As it is programmed it will move, Only along the tracks it can move. So what is the point in saying this? It means the divide between the living and the non-living is this, that there is choice and freedom in the living because of awareness, because of the presence of awareness. You know in Vedantic terms, how we look upon will, it is a dynamic aspect of self. Just like how consciousness is the static aspect of self, will is the dynamic aspect of self. Because you have a will, you can make your choices. Because you have make your choices, because you make your choices, you are free. Freedom and choice is a distinct feature of the living, non-living does not have that and that is why the worm is greater than the bullet train. Samajh mein aa raha hai? So, please try to understand by the power of your will and choice, you can do anything in your life. This causation theory, huge theory we will give you, but you must remember at any point you know a a man can can defy all laws and do something unexpected based on his will and choice hm this is the power given to us I told you one link in the chain of causation is in your hands. How you exercise it that will decide what you do with the chain and how far the chain of causation is in your hands. How you exercise it that will decide what you do with the chain and how far the chain will take you will evolve you. So, once you have understood this you see any other anything as your your smartphone recently somebody was telling me you know your smartphone does such a enormous work for you, you cannot do without it, isn't it? Indispensable ho gaya hai aaj kal. What does somebody was telling me recently, you know pehle kehate the pran jaye par vachan na jaye, aaj kal kehate hai pran jaye par mobile na jaye. They do not want, it is a big huge thing, people go into depression if they lose their mobile, long term depression. They do not want it is a big huge thing people go into depression if they lose their mobile long term depression. So, we have become so dependent on an instrument which itself functions on programming, it has no will of its own hm as it is programmed it will function like that. We have become totally dependent on this, but it will it can only function in a formulaic manner is not it, but you function according to I want you to understand the glory of the human birth, you function according to your will through your freedom. No machine can do that, no gadget can do that and that is why to exercise your will in the right direction, that is the prerogative, the glory of the human life. Especially youth is the time when you take your life into your hands. It will go in the direction I want it to go. Through my will, I will generate my future. You should be able to say this. And forget about astrologers and ah destiny and fate and all this. This assertion on your part Vivekananda very much wanted ah. This is the period of your life when you feel you can do it, you can do anything. So, you must do it and show by exercising your will. This is the purpose of causation theory. You know by tracing causation they are empowering you, please see this, empowering you to take your life into your hands. Now I want to here show you the limits of causation according to Vedanta. Ye kisliye important hai? See this great argument between determinism and free will, I do not know if you understood the significance of it after our discussion on it. The significance is this determinism, you know in science also Einstein was a determinist. He said everything is predetermined, God does not play dice. He said this is predetermined, God does not play dice, he said this you remember, but Michio Kaku says God does play dice. After the coming of quantum physics actually, quantum physics discoveries you take any of the laws of quantum mechanics, you will see there is uncertainty, there is improbability, all these have naturally come in which means what how can you say deterministic model alone is true. Even at the quantum level there is there appears to be some kind of a will and a choice by which things can go as unpredictable as ever. So, this debate continues in science and philosophy in all anywhere where there is depth there will come the problem of will and to what extent is choice free. Now Vedanta throws a very important insight here which I want to cover just now. What exactly are we trying to do? We are trying to see the limits of causation through the eyes of Vedanta. A causation theory ke three points hai. Kya hai? I am going a little abstract, but you must be able to catch it. The three points are every for every effect, there must be a cause, right? Effect itself presupposes a cause, then effect is dependent on the cause and if you remove cause you remove the effect, this is causation basically. Now you see the second point which we made here was the effect depends upon the cause, effect is there only because of cause, without cause there cannot be effect. If the if I say this table is the effect what is the cause for the table? Wood hm wood is the cause the effect is stable with respect to the effect the table wood is the cause. Now, I can bring down this table I will still have wood I can convert it into something as I can make it a chair, I can make it into something else, I can use it for an Almira. So cause remains over, it is a it is a law which is asymmetric please see. If I remove effect still cause will remain over, but if I remove cause effect does not remain over, which means what? If effect depends only on the cause for its survival, then this is what Vedanta will call it is less real than the cause, it is unreal, it is mithya, it is a kind of appearance in the cause. And with respect to this cause you had the effect, which means what if I bring the effect down, wood will remain over, but not as cause, it is just wood. So, what is the point in arguing like this, what is the meaning of this? Causality is not final, it is not the ultimate thing. Reality philosophically you know how this is applied reality is always there as it is consciousness Brahman is the reality the world of name and form is an appearance in it why they say this is you see this very table which you are seeing just now it is nothing but name form and function superimposed on wood are you getting the point? Is there something separate called table apart from wood? Yeh point catch karo thoda. You will be catching an important Vedantic point. When I am saying table, the picture of this is in your mind. I will repeat it, you hear it carefully. This is table itself means name, this form name of table and the function of a table superimposed on wood. If I remove wood will table be there something called table? Table cannot be there. So, it is nothing, but name form function given to wood the reality about this table is wood. So there is actually nothing called table, it is an appearance of wood, thick, so also cause effect is an appearance in cause always. So if you want you can have only the cause, if you bring down the down the table, you will have the cause remains over, but not causality, because cause was caused with respect to effect. This is Vedantic way of saying causality is a relative something. There are it is a relative law, it works as long as you are identified with this body and mind and 99.9% of 99% of mankind is identified with body and mind. So you must take karma theory seriously, but there if you transcend this body mind complex through Samadhi, through spiritual discipline you can go above causality. If you do not take Karma theory seriously, you know what will happen? Very superficial solutions to problems. In fact, all psychosis, neurosis, these mental problems, mental ailments, depression is due to ignorance of karmic effects. Are you understanding that today when children have to be told you have to take care of your parents, I really feel terrible. Should not this be come out naturally from us, for people who have given 20, 25 years of their life only to serving you to making you what you are today. Should you be told that you have to repay to them you have to take care of them in old age it is an insult to humankind to to have to say it. So, understand this is what is called karmic debt if you ignore this you will be in serious trouble. In fact, depression, this neurosis, all these kinds of problems over anxiety disorders, all these problems come because people are not serious about their karma. You have not been a contributor in life, then you will definitely go into depression. And you can have all kinds of treatments for that depression, you know the current treatment, you have heard of TMS experiments, transcranial magnetic stimulation, ek picture hai yaha par uska. Let me show you that you see this is transcranial magnetic stimulation, this is supposed to be a treatment modern treatment for depression. What they are actually doing is just focus your eyes on that image. It is a non-invasive procedure that uses magnetic fields to stimulate nerve cells in the brain to improve symptoms of depression. TMS is typically used when other depression treatments have been ineffective. A TMS kit is essentially a portable powerful electromagnet called a coil. Switching on the coil causes it to emit a magnetic impulse pulse and this magnetic field is strong enough to evoke electrical activity in the brain. And through this they are trying to ah bring in good mood, change mood rather and remove depression. And you try to see this it is purely symptomatic when symptoms of depression are there they will apply the coil, once you remove the coil this a mold sun scars are going to come in . Like for example, if you have a muscle spasm anywhere in the body they give you IFT in a IFT race . Temporarily you it works, but the exercise if you keep exercising the muscle then only it will get the strength to remove that pain completely. If this good exercise is not there you are just sort of stimulating the muscle temporarily . So, also any kind of a treatment for all these kind of mental disorders symptoms you must go to the core cause if there is dishonesty there then well these are all symptomatic treatments you can say they will just remove temporarily remove the symptoms but you have not removed the cause what is the cause for all this you have contracted yourself mind has contracted. That is why in our culture, even now if you go to the villages, village side, you will find people doing this Panchamahayagnyas, which means what? You have a certain debt towards your ancestors, you have a certain debt towards gods, you have a certain debt to your family, the members of your family, you have a debt towards nature, you have a debt towards animals, all of these have enriched your life. What have you given back? This is something you must think about. If you are not for that giving back, then the mind will contract in some way. No matter what kit you use, it is difficult to get rid of these kinds of problems unless the mind learns to expand and expansion comes by joyfully giving. You do this experiment in your practice. You eat an ice cream cone, see the joy you feel in your mind, go out here, number of small boys, they are destitute and constantly begging and all that. You give an ice cream cone to one fellow and watch the joy on his face and then watch the state of your mind. You will understand what I am trying to say. Aap jitna doge utna your mind will remain happy and expanded. This is the natural law of life because we do not understand this law basically this is basic yajna law. If if you do not understand this law you will only rely on synthetic enjoyments, some something is required to make ah tingle a little enjoyment in my mind. This these kind of joys lead to depression gradually, but expansive states of mind naturally lead to great happiness. It is an unasked for happiness you see you are helping somebody somewhere, but a shaft of bliss will enter your heart, pata nahi kyun, why you are just happy, you know I have seen people who are just happy by themselves, unhe kuch bhi nahi lagta, like little children, always joyful, they do not need anything to be joyful you know, their their vital energy is functioning in such a way always bubbling up with joy, mind is so clear, no negativities. Simple things you see, but it matters a lot in your life. So, do not rely on like we tell you synthetic food, synthetic do not rely on synthetic joys, you must be able to generate it in your system by yourself by becoming a giver a contributor um. And if these habits are there in your mind you will easily overcome negativities like stress, stress also is due to this of course, there too much karmic debt and you go into stress because your mind is not able to take it anymore. The simple reason you are not in charge of your body and mind and mind is not able to take the karmic debt anymore and you will go into this sad moods, bad moods what are called. So, there is a way to correct all this. These days now many types of thinking we have generated purely based on logic and rationalizing everything and to a certain extent we are ignoring these noble good emotions due to which also there are symptoms of depression everywhere, isn't it? Dekhi jab bhi aap serve karte ho kisi ko, naturally a bond is created with the other person, isn't it? It's a beautiful emotion that you have generated, it will give you satisfaction. If this element of service is not there in your life, you lose that bond, you lose that beautiful bhav, emotion which which could have come into your life. Ek baar Mahabharat mein Krishna Duryodhana ko keh rahe hain. You all your problems are due to lack of service. You never served anybody so you have become Duryodhana. So thoda dene dena seekhna hai. On an everyday basis not that you will do you will do great works later on, but let this attitude of giving become constant with us. Everyday basis something some contribution somewhere, because you we are taking that much from life. And many of these wrong ways of thinking hm you know there are people who believe in this is called reducing human experience all to neurochemistry, which means my happiness is due to dopamine release only and it is due to serotonin you know many of us are like that. Neuro physiology has taught us that these these these chemicals are responsible for your happiness. So, then the logical ah conclusion will be if you inject these chemicals you should be happy is it so? Happiness arises from what? Egg shot dopamine lalia do you think it will cure your depression and keep you always happy will it? Think and see what actually makes you happy. They are the physiological correlates of a state of your mind. You can generate the state of that mind without any synthetic aid. Why do you give up on this experience is always in the first person. If that first person is right erect, your experiences will be beautiful. Why should you rely on all this drugs or some constant entertainment required in order to keep me peaceful, this is not called peace. So, thoda ye sab theek kar lo, over exposures of the multimedia age, a kind of inundation of disjointed overlapping information which is not even required. I told you focus actually you have to be in focus mode. So, correct all this now over exposures to multimedia not required when especially at this time. Then there is a epigenetics you have heard of it. See these are all wrong ways of thinking which we pick up and we try to justify with science. Science is a great field, it is going to bring a lot of blessing into your life, but you can misinterpret some things in science. You know epigenetics putting the blame for everything on your genes, this is also a current way of thinking. Something is wrong with my brain my the the usual thing is my emotions are not in my hands hm. So, I will lay the blame on my genes. Some genetic problem is there which came to me from my parents I am not responsible. So, I am not able to control my anger. You know what is etched on your genes is based upon theconvolutions of your brain which is based upon the thoughts of your mind. Ultimately it is your mind which is closest to you is not it, you are working through your mind. If you form the right habits, the right ways of thinking now and make them very solid, all this will naturally follow, the correction will naturally follow. Aur ye cheeze agar hum naa theek karein, I never worked on my mind or on this system, but constantly I want an injection to keep me happy or I want drugs or I need films to keep me happy, you will one day you will go into very deep depression because the human mechanism is not made to be all outward bound. Aapne aapme shanti se, contentment se, anand se rehna seekhna chahiye. Then you apply that system to anything you will be successful. Yehi toh yog hai na. Apne upar kuch kaam hi nahi kiya. I can't many people actually say this after a certain age. I can't bear my mind or they will say my hormones are responsible for all my oddities or they will say my friends. I am I am very innocent. The simple problem is you have not worked on your mechanism. So, you are not getting anything out of life. So, the purpose of all our study is to make you stand up and build your life through through karma, through what you are doing, not by running away from what you are doing, through what you are doing convert it into a yoga and use it for your evolution, better understanding, more happiness, more fulfillment through serving others, giving life for others. Time is up, we will stop here.

 Music We have been discussing about the art of action, action for effective leadership, Karma Yoga. Action as you all know, it is the criterion of sincerity. It is the measure and method of true growth. How is it the measure of true growth? You see, it is knowledge lived. Isn't it? That is what action is. That is how it becomes a measure. Even if you take any great value of life, knowledge, love, love is what love does. Isn't it? Love is not just what love says, but what it does. So action, the volitional expression is actually the method and measure of growth of any value and that is the importance of action. Now the beauty about action is about karma is as you go on doing it, it actually changes you. That is the beauty of Karma Yoga. You are trying to change the subject through objective means. Many people think that good people do good work. But if anybody keeps doing good work, he will become good. This is the glory of action. This is the glory of Karma Yoga. If you keep doing good work, automatically you develop the Sanskars and become good. So today this is what we will be studying. How action leads to character, character formation. Because you see we are going to study leadership. If you today go to a leadership workshop or personality development workshop. They may give you certain very superficial ideas like leadership depends upon communication skills, soft skills, grooming all this. These are all of secondary importance try to understand. The main thing about leadership is the integrity of your personality. If you are an integrated human being, basic integrity is there, basic character, great character is there. You mean what you say, you are purposeful, you are totally committed to your goals. If your character is very high, you will be a natural leader, people will simply follow you because your will be will be so dominant over the wills of others naturally not out of great effort . So, you see leadership skills basically means this great character and in any field of life to get success you need this ah if this element is lacking struggle as you may success will not come . So, today we will see how action helps you develop your character and for that ah for those of you who came to the last class I had given you three effects of actions. Do you remember? There is an there is an external effect whenever you perform any karma any act there is an external effect upon which you have to keep an eye. So, that the job you do is perfect and then there is an internal effect hm upon which you have to keep an eye. So, that the job you do is perfect and then there is an internal effect which you cannot see what is the internal effect? The mental impression created due to the action it is called sanskar and the third effect is the cosmic effect which is Newton's third law of motion you get back the force which you have put out into the world. So, the second effect this formation of mental impression or sanskar is what creates character for you. So, any action you perform there is an internal effect within you in your mind is etched a sanskar a certain impression which will goad you further and further towards those kind of actions. This is how action leads to character we will go into detail into this psychology, but ah before I start let me give start with an example. Suppose now you went home over the weekend and you wanted to, your mother told you to help her in her everyday tasks and you did her laundry for her. Let's take this example. Ab yeh toh ek action aapne kiya, ek karma kiya. Okay. So now this work which you did, you see the external effect in this work is the clothes got cleaned . The clothes for maybe the whole family were cleaned over the weekend by you this is the external effect it is visible. The second effect is the intention the motive with which you did that job created a mental impression in your mind. Now the motives can be various one motive can be you are doing it to help your mother ok. So, the the sanskar produced here is that of help, that of service, it is a good beautiful motive. Another motive can be well ah you are you are scared your father will say something if you do not do this job. So, there what will if you do it with that motive what is the sanskar produced, it is one of fear, it's one of obedience. If you did it with a motive of well, I have to do it in order to keep peace in the household out of compulsion, then what will be the sanskar produced there? It's not going to be a very good sanskar as you can see. You have done it out of compassion not out of service not out of love. So, you see the sanskar produced in your mind is directly proportional to your intent or motive behind the work. And so, if you have to create great character the motives behind your behind the work you perform should be very good, isn't it? The motive should be very clear. Remember mixed motives will give mixed results, clear motives will give clear results. So, the motive behind your work is what actually people work upon. If that motive is clear, you will leadership will just come out of you naturally. I can give you one example here from the life of ah a late president doctor Abdul Kalam, how he was a natural leader because his motives were always so clear ah I do not know if you have read wings of fire have you read it yes his autobiography you see there you will find this incident. When the first SLV 3 was launched in 1979 he was the project manager and it it so happened that because there was some valve defect although it took off well you know SLV ah 3 it it is the first rocket required to launch satellites. So, when that was launched due to some defect it plunged into the Bay of Bengal hm and immediately there was a press meetings the press became very excited about all that was happening and then ah there was a meeting for enquiring into the project everything. And do you know Dr. Kalam just stood up and took the whole responsibility upon himself and said that ah I am sorry this happened and within a year he created another rocket ah that was the SLV 3 launched in 1980 July which was simply super successful. It actually even put Rohini into orbit the the satellite Rohini. So, the thing is when this happened again the press was very excited and they interviewed him and then he you know during that interview he gave the whole credit to his team. The very same team had worked for the previous launch also for the previous rocket also. Now you see the characteristics of a leader this is what I am showing you. What character means? When he was when they were unsuccessful, the leader took the whole responsibility upon himself. When they were successful, he gives the credit to others. So, this this is called character. This naturally will come into a person who is very clear and committed about his goals, who has basic inner integrity and Vivekananda used to say that character is nothing, but a bundle of your sanskars. The aggregate of your sanskars that second effect of good work goes to make your character ah. If always the motive has been pure, the intent has been pure for your actions, it has been good, it has been noble, it has been elevating, it has cumulative effect upon your mind and this generates your character. You see this level of development which you saw in this incident will come naturally if that that aggregate sanskaron ka jo samuha hota hai usi ko hum charitra balk ke kehte hain. The collective of our Sanskar is called Charita The sum total of the bent of his mind, we are what our thoughts are, isn't it? Thought is nothing but mental action. Hmm. And that is why take care of what you think. Thoughts live, they travel far. Whatever work you do, whatever thought you think, every moment of your body bears an impression on the mind stuff, bears an impression on the mind stuff bears an impression on your mind and we at any given moment what we are is determined by the sum total of these impressions on the mind every man's character is determined by the sum total of these impressions if good impressions prevail the character is called good if bad impressions prevail the character is called bad you see how simple it is through action you generate Sanskar Sanskar, we call the group of Sanskar as character so you see it is in your hands to create make a great character and to be successful in life because I tell you in the workplace actually what is going to matter is the person what you have made out of yourself is going to matter is the person, what you have made out of yourself is going to have all the impact and that is why this is very very important what kind of a sanskar I generated. It is something similar to your law of mass action you have studied it law of mass action what does it say? In any chemical reaction the the force of the reaction, the speed of the reaction is directly proportional to the active masses of the reactants. So, also at any given moment of time the force of your character is directly proportional to the resultant of your sanskars . This is exactly the law of mass action . So, what type of mind I have generated is very important for success in life. Please know this just adjusting superficial aspects will not do. You must become a person of that type unbending highly principled and absolutely committed to your goals and you will be naturally a leader and Karma Yoga that's why helps you do this. Now one more thing we should you should remember you should understand here is you see this sanskar goes and creates your habits also your tendencies and so character naturally becomes a bundle of your habits. So Vivekananda used to say don't say a man cannot improve, he can improve at any time because character is nothing, but a bundle of habits, you can change your habits, is not it, you can improve them. So, also a character the character of a man can change for the better, you can work towards that. So, you see nobody is hopeless that is the meaning and then practically how does this help us what generates character is a socially oriented will this is something more we should understand if the will is working towards what I can do for others then naturally your actions will bring good to everybody. Your actions will naturally create very good sanskars in your mind. So, socially oriented will see the life of any leader, whether you take Gandhiji, Eshwar Chandra Vidyasagar, Vivekananda, Shivaji, Rana Pratap, what was the will oriented towards George Washington, Abraham Lincoln take anybody it was a socially oriented will I will try to provide the maximum benefit to the maximum number of people. I will try to make changes in people's lives, I will motivate them towards high thoughts, high actions socially oriented will I will try to change the lives of others. You understand this? This is the natural you can say tendency of a leader and this is what contributes to leadership skills. Once you know a young man came to Vivekananda and told him that this actually happened long before we got independence. He came to Vivekananda and told him, uh, Swamiji, I want to meditate, please teach me. And then Vivekananda told him, uh, he looked at him and saw that neither is the mind prepared nor is the body prepared. An emaciated young man with a restless mind coming and asking how to meditate. And Vivekananda asked him, what do you do every day and he said well I sit in my room for a long time in meditation I close all the doors and windows and I try to stop my thoughts, but nothing happens. And then Vivekananda told him look my son first thing is you must open the doors and windows of your room, look around you see the people who are suffering in your own locality, see the people who are in need, go to them, do what you can do for them, serve the sick, bring education to the children of your locality who need education, who cannot provide for themselves, do what you can do your bit for others and you will see you will be your mind will naturally be able to meditate. Meditation will become a natural process if there is this socially oriented will and if there is the personally oriented will no meditation is impossible. So, you see this is the starting point of character building that the will functions towards what can I do for you, how can I help you. This is the point you have to digest and by doing this constant doing something for others bringing good into others lives, you will see you naturally overcome all your negativities, your depressions, your anxieties and create very good sanskars for yourself. These are the unique characteristics of leadership ah you know Kiran Bedi when she was in Tihar jail there were a number of convicts ah whom she had to handle on a everyday basis and ah they had all kinds of histories and you know the kind of ah environment they were kept in ah all that also has a deep effect you see on the mind of a any any person any wrongdoer you ask him why this has happened, why this has happened he will naturally tell you well I I do not know hm some kind of a compulsiveness was ah responsible for that action and then what did she do as a remedy? Punishment is not the remedy it is not the cure what she did was she made them ah the she started a small cottage industry there she made them create things which they could sell and help poor people give the sale proceedings to the to help the poor, made them create small things, ah stitching, tailoring, ah repairing shoes, a cobbler's job, made them do things by which they could help poor people. Naturally, the mindset changes. If you keep doing something to help people, you will get all the karma yog you need and all the energy you require, all the character required for leadership everything will come into your life. If this becomes a hobby, this is one of the best hobbies you can have, what can I do for you? If this disposition comes into our life, you see a lot of things will develop naturally and this is how she changed the mindsets of the people who ah she was whom she was working with. That this correction homes they also try to do this, they try to implement this that you can do this on a regular basis with convicts, you can do this for people who are depressed, you make them do something good and help others with that and you will see all the scars all the negativities are removed naturally. So, doing good makes you good, it is not just that if you are good you will do good the converse is truer. So, try to understand this how it works. Now to understand this better let me tell ah let me show you a slide you see just now we discussed this action creates sanskar, sanskar creates habits yes for the late comers please see this diagram. Actions create generate sanskars in your mind sanskars create your habits what is a habit is nothing but a collection of sanskars create your habits. What is a habit? It's nothing but a collection of sanskars and then habits go to form your character and that character further motivates you towards actions. So this is a cycle how action develops character. Please see this closely. So now few things are clear to you. Who creates our habits? We create it ourselves. Through our actions. Who creates our habits? You know, nowadays in psychology, they say something like habit cues. There are certain triggers which make you go into a habit. But the starting point of a habit is you yourself. The tendency of your mind, the mental impression in your mind is the cause for your habits that goes to create your character and that motivates you further and further towards action. Now, let us get a few things clear with this diagram. Once you have created mental impressions, it is very difficult for you to change them or go back on them That is why be careful about the mental impressions you create through your actions Iska matlab kya hai? If you get into wrong ways of thinking, living, just in order to escape some bad mood, just in order to escape your depression. If you get addicted to today you call it drug addiction, substance abuse, is not it all this, then what happens is in your own mind you will be creating grooves which are dangerous. Actually creating grooves in your mind means what you know it translates into neural pathways into your brain. The grooves which you create through your habits in your mind that is practically becoming the neural pathway created in your brain. Today's science of neurophysiology has studied this phenomenon. Iska matlab hai aap hi create kar rahe ho aapka brain kaise kaam karega. You are creating it. If you have created good positive grooving in your mind, it will result in positive neural pathways in your brain. Once you have created that neural pathway, your energy will tend to flow through that pathway only. Samajh mein aa raha hai? Ah, this is a the science of neuroscience I am telling you simply, simply put. And if you have created negative pathways pathways your energy will try to flow only in those negative pathways. This is what makes you repeat the habit again. Habit itself means something which is fixed, is not it? You look at the word h a b i t habit. If you remove h what remains? A bit remains, you remove a bit remains, you remove B still it remains that is habit. So, once you create the neural pathway it is difficult to change it, but not impossible um. This is the great science of neuroplasticity, neuroscience may yes have important concepts say I am making diluting it as much as possible for you to grasp it. Neuroplasticity is the art of changing brain connections, neural pathways at any point of time through your habits, through your sanskars, through the thought activity in your mind, you can change it, but it is difficult. Once you have created a solid neural pathway in some particular way through your actions, through your thoughts, through your emotions, it is difficult to change it, but you can change it at any point of time. This is why that is why they say the brain is plastic and this is this the whole art of doing this is what is called neuro sculpting. Iska matlab hai you actually sculpture your brain You actually sculpture your mind through your thoughts, emotions, through your actions That's why we have to be careful You see, today how our educational system is geared only towards understanding objects, the objective world. That's very good because your senses are wide open, they are seeing the objective world, is very good because your senses are wide open they are seeing the objective world you must try to understand it, but you must also understand the subject how this mechanism is functioning, is not it. If you do not know how this mechanism is functioning no matter what you get from outside it will it will not be enough. If you know how this mechanism is functioning you can handle every objective realm very well whether it is your job, whether it is your family, whether it is your interpersonal how this mechanism is functioning, you can handle every objective realm very well. Whether it is your job, whether it is your family, whether it is your interpersonal relationships, whether it is your career, whether it is your the opportunities that come into your life, you can handle them very well. If you have some knowledge of how this functions, the body mind mechanism, how the brain functions. So, you see everything the etching of your brain is through your thoughts, through your mental activities and your physical activities and that is why you must pay attention to this. Are you getting the point? That is the purpose of studying this diagram, how action develops character. So, you see your character is in your own hands. It will motivate you further and further towards actions hm and that is why good people go on getting better, bad people may go on getting worse for a certain period of time until they change gear, they change their ways. You can change, it is not that nobody it is not nobody is hopeless, you can change, but it is difficult. So create the right habits. This is the idea. Now I will give you some ideas on Sanskar from our Patanjali Yoga Sutras. Because this is the most important part. They must be telling you in your homes. Isn't it? Parents, at least grandparents must be telling you You should have good Sanskars That's why you should do this and that Do this and that Why do they say this? Because they know the heart of the whole matter is your Sanskars That is going to decide how your life is going to go You can predict If you see a child's Sanskar You can predict where his mind will go So they are trying to create that You know when we were children I studied in a convent and there the nuns used to insist that every day we put down in a in one diary which was kept for that purpose what we did for others every day we had to write at least 2 3 points I helped this person in this way or I did this today I helped my mother in doing this We had to write it down. Why? They were training us in this They were showing us through your action you can change your sanskars They were creating these good habits in us And that's why in order to put that diary, put those things in the diary we used to go and help also So you see see this is important if you do small things do it in your mind that it is important anxiety, depression, negativities will not come into your life it's so easy and if this socially oriented will is not there the basic motivation to do good is not there life is only for my pleasure for my progress, for my progress, for my ego, then well you are actually massacring your life. Itni choti baat hai, but through psychology you can understand it so well. Now you see with with the ordinary life that we lead, you can create a whole lot of sanskars which I am going to explain to you ah through yogic terms also. So, that a little yoga also you are able to digest. It will show you finally, what is required for leadership skills. You see these are the all the types of sanskars you can create through your actions. What what are they first of all klesha Sanskars or what are called impulses. Raag, Dvesh, Bhai, Asmita, all Avidya. Five Klesha Sanskars are there. This is the language of Yog Sutra. What does it mean? You must be aware of Raag. Attachment is called Raag. Don't get angry. Attachment. Dvesh is hatred. Bhai is fear. Asmita is ego, I sense and Avidya is ignorance. Now you see through our activities, through our thinking, we can create this set of sanskars which are called Kleshas. They are of the nature of impulses which means what? They are strong drives in your mind. Once you create them consciously, they will go and lodge themselves in the subconscious mind and push you towards actions from there These are negative types of Sanskars Do you understand? See, there is some positivity in this. First group, Klesh Sanskars They are impulses. Impulses are dangerous unless you know how to control them. So this is the first group. The second is what is called Vasana or Bhoga Sanskar. They produce effective experiences, experiences of life, pleasure, pain, joy, happiness, sorrow, misery, anxiety and sometimes you are just exuberant. All of this come under vasana. This is the second group of sanskars your life experiences. The third group is vidya sanskars these are due to your cognitive experiences they are called pratyayas which means due to your thinking understanding faculty. What you are studying your mathematics your physics whatever subject you are doing they are all creating vidya Sanskars in your mind Ye sab ache hai, you see the last three are not so sinister they are going to help you build your life then there is this Nirodha Sanskar which actually restrains Vritti it's a concept in Yoga and then there is a Pragnya Sanskar which produces intuition in you so through your everyday activity you can you can create any of these these are all the types of sanskars you can create on an everyday basis you are generating in your mind this much you should know then how exactly the sanskar is going to generate a character for you? We will go into this slide before that I want to point out to one thing. See habits, how are you going to change your habits? This is something you should know. Kyuki jab hum karma yog karte hain, I told you karma leads to sanskar, sanskar leads to habits, habits lead to your character isn't it this is the cycle you saw here right. Now habit changing is a big problem for our young people how do I make a habit and how can I unmake it how how do I create it how can I uncreate it sometimes we make wrong habits and then we have to work at changing them and good habits we know they are going to help us. So, how do we make create habits? The thing is a habit is only created if you repeat your actions, isn't it? Then the grooming occurs. So, a habit can be changed if by replacement techniques which means what you do not repeat a thing. Good things only are to be repeated. Now you have to pay attention to your studies because next week is the exam. So, the habit of sitting long time with sustained attention applied to your books, this must be the habit. If I study for 10 minutes, then I need 15 minutes of entertainment, then again 10 minutes of study, this is a bad habit. How can I overcome it? Suppose it has come into my experience, next I will not repeat it. I will so fix my will that my mind does not turn towards anything else during my hours of study. Agar aap repeat karte raho, the habit goes on getting stronger The way to change a habit is replacement You replace it with better habits They say habits can't be removed but they can be replaced It means you bring in something which will help you to study further Drink a cup of coffee that is better Rather than turning to something else You see, mind has limited cognitive capacity. You must apply it to one thing at a time and sustain that application. You understand for long periods of time this to be practiced. If you turn your attention to other things, well you you create the wrong habit. You understand this is what this is the cause for failure. So, coffee can be a trigger a cue for developing the good habit isn't it. You sit in a on a comfortable chair with your laptop in front of you that is a good habit . If still if you have all these accessories close to you which will help you study the habit will grow the good habit habit will grow you understand. So, habits can you can create them, you can uncreate them, create the right habits right now, your sleeping hours, your waking hours, they must be programmed for success not for failure. If the mind is so, over anxious or full of fear or depressed occasionally that I need this and that entertainment in order to pep up my mind, you have got into the wrong mode of habits. The way to change this is as I told you the positive habit cues are to be collected. You know there is a loop of habit. The loop has this first of all habit cues should be kept close to you, hm then this is all modern psychology what I am telling you. And then a a craving a craving for the goal to be achieved is to be created yes right and then a response reward and response mechanism is to be created which means what if I have my my immediate goal is to do very well in the upcoming assignment next week then what will I do I will promise myself a period of rest after the test if I work well now a kind of reward mechanism you are giving yourself I will be able to do what I like after this period . So, then the mind will obey you the mind will sit there you understand otherwise it can become very restless at some point of time . So, try to understand there are ways of developing good habits and if you are able to develop habits which will keep you focused on your goals, then your success is guaranteed . If you develop the wrong habits enormous energy is wasted and you have to collect it again bring it into a particular ah sort of pathway and then only you will get success. So, see here I will also I would like to point out to a phenomenon called incentive salience. Have you heard of it? Incentive salience is a big concept today. It is actually an analysis of what is called craving want and why we have irrational wants which will lead us nowhere. Still we have it. Isn't it true? See the relevance of all this in your own life. It is, it is everyday life you are facing it. What is the cause for irrational wanting? See let me explain this phenomenon of incentive salience because it is important for you. This is all modern psychology but this is deeply rooted in a very strong yogic idea which I will come to at the end see what is salient? you can say what is salient feature of something? now what is the salient feature of Delhi? that it is the capital of India salience means what sets something apart from everything else. The characteristic feature of something is it is salient feature. So, now saliency detection it is actually a key attentional mechanism and a learning process today by which what do you do? You see it helps you focus your limited cognitive and perceptual capacities on a subset of available sensory data. It helps you focus when you are able to remove the salient feature of something it it helps you learn that thing better is not it. So, it is a key learning mechanism. Now, in this incentive salience what is happening is it is a strange mechanism of our mind, it is a cognitive process actually which makes you want something more and more whether you like it or not. And usually the want motivates you towards an already rewarding object. I will give you examples to help you understand this. It is an analysis of craving as I told you. Usually what are the things which you crave for which you want, things which have given you happiness in the past, is not it? Something you enjoyed in the past that your mind will start craving for another experience of it, but this incentive salience is such a irrational desire it creates such an irrational desire whether you have experienced joy or not, whether it is good for you or not, whether you like it or not a kind of restless acquisition remains in your mind wanting it craving for it without any experience of it this is called incentive salience. It is actually due to ah the neurotransmitter dopamine it is that is supposed to be the psychology behind it. Even without an experience just due to dopamine release you can suffer incentive say ah salience and it is a totally irrational process. It you see ah technically it is defined as Q triggered decision utility is greater than remembered utility, which means what Q triggered you may find a few Qs that triggers a decision to acquire something beyond what your memory directs you to get. So, it is just an irrational craving which you cannot get rid of sometimes. Let me give you an example, maybe you are passing through your IIT bakery shop, I do not know if you have a bakery shop here, fruit juice stall is there. So, if you are passing through that during lunch time, you already had your lunch, but there will be a craving to experience something more ah. You are studying something you went to a web page advertisements popped up naturally your finger will go towards let me see what this product is about incentive salience. There is this strange situation when you can want something more and more while even liking it less and less. This is a kind of aberration of the human mind and the solution to this they have not yet found but the solution is wonderfully given in the Bhagavad Gita. Can you imagine? This very same concept has been put very beautifully in the Bhagavad Gita. Those shlokay, I will just tell it here, recite it here, try to catch the solution. See in one of the, in the conversation between Krishna and Arjun in the Bhagavad Gita, at one point he says, dhyayato vishayan punsa, sanghas teshopajayate. As you go on thinking of objects, sense objects, you develop a sort of attachment towards them. You see just thinking vritti creation makes you feel attached after some time. Whether you like it or not, whether you have experienced it or not, you see incentives aliens, you start getting attached Sangha Sanjayate Kama that attachment creates desire Kamaat Krodho Bijayate from this desire not that you will always get it maybe there is no money in your pocket to buy juice or cake or whatever so then anger comes from anger comes a sort of delusion a kind of moha and this makes you forget what is in your memory you see remembrance utility is compromised. This is incentive salience. Samohas smriti vibramahas smritir brahmashad buddhinasho. If you forget all the good things stored in your memory, if your memory no longer directs you, what will it lead to? Buddhinasho. Smritir brahmashad buddhinasho. It results in, uh, nash of your intellect, destruction of your intellect buddhinashad pranashyati that is the moral death of the person. If your intellect no longer directs you towards what you should do, you are totally under the grip of some ah negative emotion, some kind of craving, some kind of compulsion, some unconscious force, then you can it can result in a moral death, you can you will go and do the wrong thing. This is how you see compulsively you can be led towards a very wrong action, you are wanting craving something more and more which is not good for you at all maybe. So, what is the starting point of this? Dhyaayato vishayan pumsa, is not it? It led to buddhinashat pranasyati. The starting point is you started thinking too much of something which was not required. You paid too much attention to something which was not required for your experience. You you get the point hm you literally meditated on something which is of no use to you that is why I say directed thinking directed attention directed towards definite goals goal orientation first condition for success. If this is not there, you can never be a leader. Hoga toh hoga, nahi hoga toh bhi chalega. Such people cannot be leaders anywhere. If I don't achieve it, who will achieve it? The path will become clear if you do this. And remember these psychological points which I am giving you just paying attention to something which is of no consequence to your life will generate an attachment towards it that is the cause for incentive salience and it leads to finally, the moral death of the person. So, that is why I say become aware of the great goals of your life and assert that awareness I take my life into my hands I am in charge of this instrument and I will direct it towards my purposes do not allow all these unconscious forces to remove you from this hm this is one thing which you have to understand let me ah give you one ah one ah understanding here. The practical utility of this psychology is it brings you into a condition where you know you are reliable you know this is this confidence which is required for leadership skills comes from this. If you develop this form of self control which means what my awareness decides which way my life will go, which way my faculties will move. When I understand this what happens is I learn to rely upon myself. Kisi bhi situation mein I know I will take the right decision. I know my will will go towards my goals. It will not get bifurcated, it will not go away from my goals. Samajh mein aaraya hai, then when you find yourself reliable, you will develop confidence. Hai na? If you find yourself unreliable, in any can you develop confidence, can you have confidence, only idiots have confidence in such situations. Andar kuch bhi nahi hai fir bhi they are acting very confident. have confidence in such situations . It is only your reliability and your clarity which gives you confidence. Please see this 100 percent reliability any situation I will only act according to my principles and ideas. This is character and this is the nature of a leader. This only comes if you have paid attention to the system, how it works and directed your attention towards what really matters to you, do not get carried away of advertising agencies in to carry you away to buy their products, isn't it? Anywhere it is like a market, marketing tactics all these are, but you must be focused, you must be alert and aware and you must take your life into your hands, you are perfectly capable of it. You see the secret of success lies in directing your will, keeping the will in your hands. My will is not compromised for something silly in life then you will be successful anywhere so now, now let me go into one concept which is very important, too much of psychology I am giving you in this session, but that's why I am interspersing it with stories kyunki ye psychology ek baar aap pakad loge na, aapko your whole life it will help you for your whole life so you know in any situation why my mind is working like this, what steps I should take you see, the sanskars which you have generated as a result of your actions what happens, the fructification of a sanskar is an important concept for you to understand so that you understand what happens with impulses say how it directs my action to understand this see if this diagram is very simple although it looks complicated there on the slide hm once you have through your actions you have generated sanskars in your mind they get lodged in your memory once they get lodged in your memory, in fact, most of your thoughts are memories. So, when your memory is filled with these sanskars, according to your sanskars will be your impulses. It generates your impulses. There can be, impulse may not even be the right term here, but why I am giving you this is suppose there are negative sanskars in the mind then usually impulses come out which means you are only half aware of them you understand if there are too many negative sanskars and they impel you towards action. This is always the sequence memory impulse and action. Memory is sanskars lodged in your mind. They create impulses for you and goad you towards particular actions. Now the way to overcome this cycle again those actions will create further sanskars. Let me give you an example. Let's take the simple example of cigarette smoking Maybe you have that habit, you want to overcome that habit Now what is happening is, once you smoke a cigarette, a new Sanskar is created That will make you want to smoke a cigarette again and again The slightest cues, you saw a man smoking or the smell of nicotine And immediately you want to hold a cigarette or you saw an advertisement and you want to although the statutory warning is always there still incentive salience you will the craving will be there to smoke a cigarette. Now you see because in your memory the sanskars have become lodged of cigarette smoking whether you like it or not still you will want to do it. Now that impulsively you will hold a cigarette and light it, it pushes you towards the action doing this again and again creates this is a cycle again you see will create the Sanskar again the whole thing it keeps getting repeated. Now the way to break this habit stop this is you must be able to de-link memory and impulse You can de-link. How do you de-link memory and impulse? It means that even if you have a desire in your mind, the impulse should not come I must be able to stop there. It's just another thought The impulse should not get generated. How is this possible? This is only possible if you have replaced cigarette with something else which is more attractive to you. You understand? It can be some soft drink which you took as a replacement for the habit of smoking, it can be some particular food, it can be your study material the habit of smoking, it can be some particular food, it can be your study material which you like more, it can be your laptop, it can be anything which you use as a substitute for the cigarette. Whenever you feel the urge to smoke, no rather do that rather see some good thing on your mobile here a good YouTube talk, but that is the way to replace these things. I told you habits can be replaced that is the way to overcome them, sanskars can be replaced. So, you can de-link memory and impulse if you create enough good sanskars in your mind, even if the memory of the cigarette comes to your mind the impulse will not come the two have got you have broken the cycle and this will naturally create another ah stop between the impulse and the action. So, when the impulse is not coming the action will not take place a time gap has been created. So, you have enough time to think of the harmful effects of cigarette smoking you, you understand impulsive behaviour would have gone by by this. Isilya create the good sanskars in your mind, the heart of this is this much only ki good habits good sanskars in your mind. Dekhi another common example which many in IIT have asked me is inability to get up early in the morning. Is this true ah with all of you? Maybe you work till 12 o'clock, 1 o'clock, some some even till 3 o'clock I heard hm and then you are not able to get up early in the morning, but all of us keep telling you it is very good to get up early to bed early to rise makes a man healthy wealthy and wise. Now, what to do? How to develop this habit of getting up early? Many times if you ah maybe at 12 o'clock, you decided I will get up at 5 o'clock and you set your alarm and you went to sleep at 5 o'clock as soon as the alarm ah rang, this is what you did. You see what is given in the slide? threw the alarm or put and went back to sleep now what is happening here, see there is no sanskar of waking up early in the mind so the memory of sleeping pushes you towards the action here it's actually inaction it is going back to sleep the memory impulse action generated as a result of lack of sanskars of getting up early push you towards sleep alone. So then how to change the situation I will start I will force myself to get up early for a week through the alarm and I will create at that time an atmosphere and ambience which I will like maybe you go out on a walk or in in IIT you can do so many things you the the air is so crisp you can do something in the playground you can take good exercise you can do yoga you can go into very good reading at that time thoda yoga kar liya ya thoda prayer kiya how many things you can do? Once you get a taste for these things, you have created enough sanskars to break this cycle. You understand? Once you get a taste for these things, so then this memory impulse action cycle will get broken. So, when your alarm rings after a week, naturally you will get up, not with anger. You understand? You can break this cycle. This is what I am trying to tell you This is how the fructification of a sanskar takes place And you can change anything you want to change in your life You can de-link memory and impulse You can stop an action, a wrong action At any point of time you can do this So please understand a little work on ourselves is required It is not enough to have objective knowledge, you need to have subjective knowledge as well This is subjective knowledge isn't it? How to change yourself? This is what it is telling you You know earlier in schools and all that it was mandatory to teach children Even we as children had moral science classes to teach children the importance of developing good sanskars. Aapko shayad ye story pata hai Gandhi ji ke life mein hi aati hai. The school inspector was going around Gandhi Gandhi school. You remember he was a small boy at that time and the teacher to impress the inspector gave them a dictation of English words and one spelling Gandhiji had written wrong and the teacher was telling him see your neighbor and write the right spelling because he only wanted to show the inspector how well the class is doing and Gandhiji did not move the little boy refused to lie to tell an untruth Dekhiye usi umar se aise sanskar the isliye later on he was the greatest advocate of satya ahimsa all these great values of life usi umar se the sanskar creation was towards truth towards towards honesty, complete integrity This is the thing, this is what I am trying to tell you Sanskar can be generated, specifically target towards creating the right stuff in your mind so that your actions are always reliable, you find yourself always confident This is a possibility in your life is k baad hum jaayenge the analysis of behavior you see to become a successful leader through karma it is performance alone is not enough isn't it what is more important than IQ tell me EQ is more important is it a conviction I am boring is the uphunker rave is it true or not behavior is important or no even when you go to a job interview they are going to look at you first then what you know and what you can do or you cannot do, what what you radiate the confidence that you have, the purposefulness in your eyes that is all the more important and your general behaviour, the way you talk, the way you walk. So, behaviour and character are related. What is behaviour is actually your reactions to your to any given environment. The reactions on the physical mental plane, the reaction of your will, the reactions of your emotions, you know this is what behavioral psychology studies. So, your behavior at any given point of time is very important for success in life and that is why EQ, SQ, everything becomes important Your emotional quotient, you must have heard If you are saying one thing but you don't mean it you don't think you will be successful If you are not saying something but just radiating it but then you you can you can still be successful. Communication skills alone are not enough. You must mean what you say, you must do what you believe in, that is when your team will follow you. So, yehi baat hai, now regarding this behavior, how it is created also you must know the deep level psychology of it. If once you know it, then you you modulate your behaviour according to your requirements, is not it? In the work place space you need a particular behaviour, with your colleagues you need a particular behaviour, with your family you need a particular behaviour, you will know what to do in every instance. You see behaviour also is nothing, but interconnected sanskars bundled into what are called complexes you must have heard of complexes in psychology they result in different traits of character which is called behavior Your Sanskars that you create through your actions They get bundled or interconnected into a network of complexes And these are responsible for your traits of behavior Traits means each tendency This is called Swabhav And this process is called Swabhav So, you have to understand that the process of creating Sanskars is not a process of creating but it is a process of creating and it is a process of creating and it is a process of creating and it is a process of creating and it is a process of creating These are responsible for your traits of behavior Traits means each tendency This is called Swabhav And this is what is highlighted Whenever you are interacting with any particular environment So you see if your Sanskar backpack is very solid, very good You can be sure your behavior will be very good Right? It has a source in the sanskars are you getting it? just polishing the outside is not enough behavior is not polishing the outside behavior is showing who you truly are so this is the psychology that you should understand in order to achieve success anywhere in life hm character, behavior all these are very important. You see behavioral psychologists in the last century many of them likeWatson and Skinner all these people believed that the main learning process is conditioned learning. You know conditioning have you heard of, psychological conditioning which means associating ideas and repeating so that you are conditioned into a particular knowledge, but later on it was found that it is not. So, the main learning faculty in the human being due to our well developed brain cortex, it is cognitive learning. You learn by understanding, you learn through knowledge, is not it? You take a chimpanzee and a human child. For the chimpanzee, the only way you can communicate with him is through sign language and he will understand also like that, but a child will start picking words quickly, isn't it? So, in us this is what distinguishes the human species that cognitive learning is the main way of learning. So, just by understanding all these concepts, you make them part of your personality, you can integrate them into your personality. That is why this conceptual understanding is very important for you . Iskebad let usgo into this thing the very purpose of karma the actions that you perform is to break the tyranny of your habits to create great great character and thus consciously shape your destiny. If you do not create a great character through work, through the right sanskars, you are unconsciously shaping your destiny, then it is not called destiny, it is called fate. Unconsciously something is happening, isn't it? Pata nahi kaise ho raha hai, kyun ho raha hai, kuch bhi pata nahi. If you are, if you have taken all of this into your hands, it is destiny for you. You have consciously shaped it. You know where you are going. You know what you can achieve. Right? Otherwise, everything is by chance as it were coming into your life. You are not in charge of anything. You are not in control of anything. So this is what psychology gives you this If you have consciously developed your character You have consciously built your life And you can do it through your work Let me give you a story here And we will end this session See, in the same situation If you do the right will Do the right work You can change the entire circumstances of your life. And if you are lazy, not given to work, not given to working hard in life, you can never build your life. Let me tell you, this is a real story covered by Time magazine many years back. There was two children were growing up in a slum hmm have you heard of this story they were growing up in a slum and as a water the mother was not there the mother had died and the father was a drunkard and these children they very young one was I think five years old and the elder brother was seven years old and nobody was there to 7 years old and nobody was there to look at their education, nobody was there to feed them at home, the father used to come late at night and batter them and these 2 children were sort of full on what to do with life and the the elder brother ah in a sense was a lazy also ah not not given to too much work, but this younger brother he wanted to get out of this situation it came into his head why should I live my whole life like this in this slump. And he consciously went around exploring a school found a village school there and close by close to Islam and educated himself till class 5. Then he got into ah some kind of a training along with the training he passed SSLC he finished class 10 he came out in flying colors. So, he was provided with a scholarship for further study he completed his ah ah class 12 got into he took a simple graduation course after that he did his MBA and he came out in such flying colors he got into marketing. Finally he ended up becoming the CEO of a multinational company in US a super success in life by the age of 30 he was earning billions of dollars he was almost a billionaire. Now, this very successful story ah was he was interviewed and this this elder brother this is the success story of the younger brother the elder brother lived right where he grew up he was in that slum he grew into another drunkard made nothing of himself in life and constantly blaming others ah criticizing others and drinking at night. So, followed in the footsteps of his father now both these brothers who were so, different from each other they were interviewed separately and this younger brother who was doing so, well the US, he was asked, ki aapke life ki success story, what is the secret of your success? And he said hard work with a father like that, I knew I had to stand on my own feet. So, I worked very hard. What else would you expect one to become with a father like that and then this man this elder brother who was still in that same slum they didn't know he was the brother they they interviewed him here and they asked him how have you reduced yourself to this state and he said what else do you expect one to become whose father is like that? Same answer. Aap dekhiye same situation, same circumstances, same environment, what made the difference? Work, will, attitude, commitment. So, do not blame your circumstances, do not blame anybody in your life. Your life is what you make out of it, how you are disposed towards life, what orientation you have given yourself, what training you have given to this mechanism will decide your success in life. Kabhi doosro par blame mat dalna. Even the most difficult circumstances can be overcome if your intelligence, your life energies, your body mind is working for you. If they are not working for you, if they are working unconsciously, then you will you never know where life will lead you. Then everything is unconscious in your life you know it is all happening by chance. So, you have in you this power to guide your life, you take the reins of your life in your own hands through your character, through your hard work, through the application of your mind mainly hard work means where you have applied your mind, how much of your mind mainly hard work means where you have applied your mind how much of your mind you have applied . And then you can do anything with your life you can create a great life or you can create a miserable life it is your choice entirely that is why Vivekananda used to say you are the creators of your destiny stand up be bold be strong take the whole responsibility on your shoulders and know that you are the creators of your destiny. How many times has Swamiji given this message for young people? Never say, Oh, I am not destined for this, it is not written here, my astrologer said this or my parents had told me that what will you do anyway no such nonsense you are perfectly capable of any achievement you must only know the means this psychology is being given to you so that you take your life into your hands so if you promise to do this, this course will be a success I am not bothered whether you get the credit or not but I am bothered that you create a great life based on these ideas. Will you promise me that? Yes. Then we will continue with this course. Let me end by giving you a message for this today's session which is there again in the Bhagavad Gita. Ek bahut sundar shlok hai. Uddhared atmana atmanam na atmanam avasadayet. Atmaiva hi atmano bandhu, atmaiva ripur atmanah. Very powerful message. You are your own friend, you are your own enemy. If you raise yourself by yourself, you will be your friend. If you degrade yourself by yourself, because your will was not committed, you are your own enemy. There are no friends and enemies outside. You know that is all tertiary, not even secondary. What I did out of my system is going to decide my success in life. Understand this well And take charge This awareness will generate the required will The will will generate the right action Through the right action you will have the right decisions Through your right decisions you will have success This is the sequence Take the whole thing into your hands. From now onwards, IIT itself means you are at a very special position at a at a great vantage point, point of advantage actually. If you can at this point understand that yes, I can do anything, you will do it, nothing else matters this is the secret of success ok at the heart of it all is character what makes character action ok we will end the session here . Thank you.
 Music Welcome to the third session. Today we are going to discuss a very important mood philosophical point, determinism versus free will. Have you heard of it determinism and free will? See we feel our life is our choices, isn't it? We are free to make the choices we want and we feel our choice is actually freely made by us. It is under our will, it is an act of our volition. So, free will belongs to me. This is my general feeling. You see just now if I want to raise the volume of my voice I can do it, I want to turn right I can turn right, I can turn left, all our actions we feel are under our will, is not it. The very definition of free will means it is the ability to choose any particular course of action unimpeded, unhindered that is what we call free will. If I have it, if I am able to do it, then I say I have free will hm and if there are certain conditions through which no my will will not work or it is due to some other unconscious forces my will is functioning due to that, then I cannot call it free will as such so now today's topic of discussion is is there really a free will or are they just unconscious forces pushing us towards willing something towards any particular decision what is the fact about human life is there free will or is everything predetermined, predestined? You must have heard these words. You have heard that everything is already predetermined, it is already prefixed. So what is the reality? This is what we are going to explore today. Free will is a very important concept because we believe, instinctively we feel our life is made of our choices and at any given point of time you are put you are free to act as you wish. You are free to make your own decisions you are free to will in a particular direction is not it make a particular sankalp up is free hey yeah he to a humara anubhav hey is not it. is free . So, what is this ah particular debate? It is been going on for centuries determinism and free will. One group of people hold that know everything is predetermined and some people hold know everything is under ah my will my my life is my choice. So, even in science this debate is there in philosophy also this is a huge debate we will be ah discussing this extensively. Q because it is so important for karma yog. If my choices are not mine then who is deciding my choice, then how is my work mine? You understand your work is due to your will, your will is your choice, but if somebody else is making that choice, how can you call it your work? Your moral obligation towards your action, moral responsibility is because you are making it, is not it? So, it is very important to explore this question. The power of your will that is the entire human life if you see human civilization it is an expression of the power of the human will is not it. You see nature ah gave us inhospitable climate in so many areas. What did man do out of his will? He created cities, he made homes with lighting, with cooling, with heating so that he surmounted the obstacles of climate, surmounted the obstacles of nature hm. The nature made life difficult due to distances. So, what did the human will do? It created roads, it created means of communication, it created public transport systems so that you can move about freely wherever you want. How many ways of communication today instantly you can communicate with anywhere in the world. So, all this is happened due to what due to the human will, you willed that no this is the kind of life I will have, this is possible and you exercise your intellect, your will and your intellect and you created this civilization. This is the story of mankind, is not it? So, we sort of instinctively feel we have the capacity to do whatever we want to do. Now, this is what is being challenged in this particular debate between free will and determinism. You have to pay attention otherwise you will miss the points. It is a very important thing for you to know. Remember this culture always ah it it rises above the purposes of nature. The very fact that man has been able to control external conditions shows he has risen above nature externally externally is not it in physical effects. So also you can control your internal nature you can can cannot you ah see before your exam how you fix your concentration on the things you want to do. Some other distracting thought comes you can put it aside you can control your internal nature you can control your mind your emotions you can gear them up towards your goals. So, both external and internal nature you are able to surmount the obstacles and bring it under your control through your will. So, this capacity because you have you instinctively naturally feel a sense of free will with you all the time. Now, this is being challenged in a particular experiment which was conducted few years back by ah a great ah ah he was actually a pioneer in the study of consciousness studies. Consciousness studies his name is Benjamin Libet . Benjamin Libet actually conducted this experiment ah he was ah sort of neuroscientist psychologist and he ah started this debate due to his experiments. He passed away quite recently in 2007. So, what is this experiment like? See observe the experiment it is something very interesting. I have a diagram of the experiment here. This Benjamin Libet's experiment on free will, he hooked up a human subject to a EEG machine. What does an EEG machine do? It maps, it gives brain scans of brain activity, especially the motor ah activity in your cortex cortical region that was tracked through this EEG machine, the motor cortex of your brain ah. And what was the actual experiment about it was about decision volition the subject was given two switches let us say a blue switch and a red switch and he was asked to press one of these switches as per his decision hm. Now, before he press one of the switches say let us say the blue switch he had to announce when he felt this urge to act he had to announce yes and press the blue switch. This was the experiment and the EEG machine will be scanning his brain his motor cortex for whatever activity is going on there. So, the subject started hm when he was asked he immediately he decided on the blue switch he announced and he press the blue switch. Now the scans which they found that is the brain activity which went into making this decision was something very impressive. You know from his standpoint from the phenomenological standpoint phenomenology means from the how you feel about something from his standpoint from the phenomenological standpoint phenomenology means from the how you feel about something from his standpoint it was a split second decision. It was something he immediately decided, but the scans showed brain activity almost 7 seconds prior to the decision . If your brain has been active on that decision 7 much much before you took the conscious decision and press the switch, it means there are subconscious unconscious pre decisions leading you towards the decision in your conscious brain. And he repeated this experiment many times and every time this is what was found that there is definite activity in the brain, a number of factors involved due to which a number of pre decisions take place due to a chain of causes and finally, you announce a decision and the urge to movement is there, it is called the readiness potential which gives the urge towards movement ah that is pressing the blue switch. Before that so much of activity has taken place. So, literally speaking the subject is led to a decision it is not a split second decision it is not an immediate decision which he took which means what your decisions are not in your conscious mind, subconscious unconscious forces have urged you towards a particular decision a particular moment. So, now, this has in a enormous implications for both science philosophy for our karma yog what are the implications can you tell me? me that means, your actions are not under your conscious will exactly and it means well a corollary you can draw from this is if my actions are not under my conscious will or the effects of my actions ah due to me it it removes the moral responsibility from the person. You can very well say well the right and wrong of an action I am not responsible for it because unconscious forces drove me towards it. It removes moral responsibility. So, deep implications this has because we know we are responsible for our actions the morality of the action is ours whether it is a right action or wrong action you are responsible for it is not it whether whether who whatever action you perform at some point you have said yes or no. So, it was performed this is the general understanding, but this libids experiment it turned the tables towards determinism determinism it is predetermined the effect of your action. The action itself willing itself is sort of preordained, it is due to unconscious urges pushing you towards something and so free will does not have much play, the will is not free this was the conclusion. Now this sparked a huge debate philosophers like see for example, I will tell you ah Susan Blackmore . She said conscious experience takes some time to build and is too much ah too slow to be responsible for making things happen . So, it is quite possible that unconscious for ah forces are responsible for a man's willing and action. This is quite a possibility. When our thinking itself is compulsive, our willing can only be marginal, try to think and see originally. So, this is a possibility and then many other philosophers commented on this and Libet found one more thing. As I told you he repeated this experiment many times he found one more thing that is the power of the free won't it is better studied through Libet's experiment this free ah just like how we think of free will ki may yeh kaam kar sakta hoon waise hi there is a free won't it is called veto which means I will not do this particular action that can be better studied because you see whenever there is an action is to be performed a conscious acquiescence which means agreement is required for the readiness potential to be built up for the urge towards the moment urge towards the action readiness potential did you understand from the diagram please look at the diagram there . When you are ready to perform the action what is exactly happening what has built up in your my ah brain is the readiness potential. When it reaches its peak look at the diagram when it reaches 0.10 then the the movement onset is there, but before that look at the amount of activity in the brain onset of RP is there time of awareness of urge to move is there. So, much of activity has preceded the movement onset you understand and you thought it was immediate your decision is your decision it was immediate so this is the problem there is something which compels a person to make a decision which urges a particular decision so is this study not important? you only think it is very important because after all you will be blamed for the decision you will be blamed for the action isn't it? now what are these forces? this is what we will study. Ah Libet especially pointed out in the case of veto which means a free won't, a conscious acquiescence, a conscious agreement, a solid no in the conscious mind is required for the readiness potential to build up to a point where you will perform or not perform the action. This has been caught very well through Libet's experiment. I will give you a simple example here hm for you to understand this better. See for example, next week are your exams, this weekend your friend tells you come let us go for a movie. Now, the unconscious response to this is ha chalo ch, thoda ah get us let us get a entertain and come, but at this point your conscious mind will put a solid no. Yeh hota hai na? No, no, I have to do well in this exam, it is very important for me. So, you see this conscious no in your mind, this is the power of veto. This has been caught when your mind stands and says no to this particular action, immediately what will happen the RP the the readiness potential will stop and the urge towards movement will not be there. It has come through what your conscious know. This has again been tracked in ah Libet's experiment. So, you see all acts are not necessarily instigated by your unconscious especially acts that are of this type where it is required to put a solid stand a solid know they cannot be instigated by the unconscious. This also was found since I will give you the actual scientific data. Since the subjective experience of the conscious will to act preceded the action by only 200 milliseconds, this leaves your conscious mind only 100 to 150 milliseconds to veto an action. Which means if your conscious mind decides something no matter how much readiness potential has been built up you can reverse movement, you will not act accordingly. Samajh mein aara hai? Are you catching the point? Which means what? Is determinism true or free will true? Now you must start thinking originally, is my action my action or something is leading me to that action more data I will give you. So, you have understood the position of determinism hm what is it telling you determinism it is telling you that no your actions are due to urges which are predetermined unconscious forces have pushed you towards this particular action. Now between this determinism and free will, you are understanding that you are free to do your action, whatever action, you are free to your will, your will is a free thing. Between these two is another position called compatibilism. These are all moot philosophical points which you should absorb. Compatibilism ka matlab hai, the two are not incompatible determinism and free will are not two, both are not incompatible they are compatible with each other, how do they explain this? you see your free will is due to your motives they say your motives are not free you are free to will whatever you want, but the motive behind that free will is not free. This is the position of compatibilism. In fact, Arthur Schopenhauer, he once said it is a it is a wonderful statement. He said man can do what he wills, the problem is he cannot will what he wills. Did you get the point? You can do what you will, but you cannot will what you will. Your will takes something else to be built up into action, to come out as action. So this we will be further studying, which means what a certain amount of predetermined push is there behind every choice, behind every ah what you feel your will, behind that it is there. In fact, Vivekananda once said the very purpose of education is to train you to will rightly which means you can will wrongly. You see between determinism and free will how many positions are there? What what they are trying to tell you is there is a chain of causes which leads you to a particular decision, but in that chain there is one autonomous loop or link holding which you can draw the whole chain into your hands. You can do it that is why Vivekananda says the purpose of education to is to train you to will rightly. You see will power it is not that you adamantly obstinately build it up in some way. Training the will means actually freeing the will progressively from compulsions, from wrong ideas, negativities, complexes in your brain. Freeing it as you go on freeing your will it becomes free will. This is the way to train the will and this is the method all these great ones have prescribed for us remember this and this ah point was made by another great philosopher he said Kant actually said this there is nothing more absolutely good than a good will which means what you can generate these states of mind with a certain amount of training. Training your will does not mean obstinate or adamant, it means freeing your will from compulsions from negativities in your mind, how to do it, what is to be done, we will go deeply into this. See philosophical approach is very important, psychological approach also is very important because psychology is what you can actually do about your free will. How do I free my will? If this is the purpose, how do I bring everything into the conscious plane? How do I make everything my choice? Then my karma will be my karma, is not it? Not that I am being pushed by unconscious forces towards doing a particular thing. So, this is what we will pay more and more attention to before we go into the psychology of free will, how to generate a genuine absolutely free will. We will go into the thoughts of some great masters on this. Why are their thoughts important? You see, jino ne mind ko transcend kiya hai, they are able to give some of the best ah understanding of all these your faculty of cognition, affection, volition, free will, they are able to throw immense light on that why they are not within the realm of the cogitative mind, they have been able to transcend that realm. When you take a completely objective perspective of something, then what happens you are able to study it best. So, this is what they have been able to do. They have been able to step out of the mind not jumping of the mind, stepping out of the mind into the realm of pure awareness due to which mind activity is understood very well by them. So, we will go into some of the statements of these great masters and you will see what light they throw on free will and determinism. Yeah, up Kelly about important a look first I will give you Vivekananda on free will. He says as long as you are in the network of time, space and causation to say you are free is nonsense because in that network all is under rigorous law sequence and consequence every thought that you think is caused every law sequence and consequence. Every thought that you think is caused every feeling has been caused. It is only when the infinite existence comes as it were into this network of Maya that it takes the form of will. Will is a portion of that being caught in the network of Maya and therefore, free will is a misnomer. It means nothing. So, is all this talk about freedom there is no freedom in Maya. See so long we have been telling you that you are the creators of your own destiny, but this you must understand your free your will free will is limited just now. It can be made progressively free, is not it last two classes I had been telling you your destiny is in your hands provided you have worked on building your will provided you have made it genuinely free then your destiny is in your hands. This is the meaning you see the very next sentence Vivekananda is which I put there is only the free have free will he says with the rest the will is bound immediately you see when the mind comes into the matrix of time space and causation what happens to that mind it gets limited your will is nothing but a compound of the mind and the self mind and consciousness it is a compound of the two when the mind is limited how the will can be free the will also is limited the will gets When the mind is limited, how the will can be free? The will also is limited. The will gets limited. The more you can extricate your mind from limitations, free your mind from limitations, the more free the will also will become. This is the meaning of what Vivekananda is telling you. That's why, it's just free will. Free will is not by saying. You should work on it a little. You must clear your mind. Genuinely free your will and then what will remain is free will only That's why it's a possibility, free will is a possibility And that's why Vivekananda says the free have free will Until you are free, you cannot say I have free will So try to understand the position, when we go into the psychology of it you will understand it even clearer. Then Vivekananda also says everything is predestination and a part of that predestination is that you have such feelings as the feeling of freedom. As long as the mind is bound within time space and causation you cannot call the will free hm the, but last he asserts again he tells you, but stand up be bold be strong take the whole responsibility on your own shoulders and know that you are the creators of your destiny. All the strength and succor that you want are within you which means what this is a great message of hope that you can create a genuinely free will You have in you the capacity to do it Train your mind, clear your mind and will will become absolutely free It's a possibility, it is not an impossibility Determinism, bolne ka matlab ye nahi hai Forever your will is bound You can work towards a free will And this is the glory of yoga psychology actually what it is trying to tell you is this your will can be made free your mind can be made crystal clear the fact about who you are can be revealed to you if you bring a little bit of yoga in your life you will see your choices indeed you will be making not that some unconscious urge is making you do it If you bring a little bit of yoga in your life Not being able to train, you see, if mind itself is full of only compulsive habits, then the will cannot be free in that state. Ye hi sameshne ki baat hai yahan par. Beyond this, let me show you one more slide. You see, here you have a beautiful illustration given by Sri Ramakrishna. He says, it is God alone who has planted in man's mind what the Englishman calls free will. People who have not realized God would become engaged in more and more sinful actions if God had not planted in them the notion of free will. Sin would have increased if God had not made the sinner feel that he alone was responsible for his sin. Then he gives this beautiful example look at it. Suppose a cow is tied by a rope to a pole if it wants to satisfy its hunger then it has to exert itself and move in the area covered by the radius of the rope and eat the grass in that area this can be compared to man's free will . If a cow is tied to a post, how much of freedom it will have as long as the rope is, it is tied to the post, so it can munch only a bit of that grass, so your will also is like that, in a way it is tied, tied up and you have been given only that much as much as the length of the rope, that much of free will has been given to you, if you keep exercising it in the right direction, what will happen? The owner will come and tie with a longer rope at a better spot. So, you can munch more grass. This is how will develops in a sense. A certain amount of tether has been given to you, a certain length of the rope that much of free will you have, you can increase it. If you work on where you are exercising your will in the right direction you will get more and the will will get more and more free that is the meaning. So, it is possible to develop a free will. Look at the statement again the cows freedom of movement is limited to the circle of space determined by the length of the rope. Similarly an ordinary man is bound by one's karma which limits one's freedom of will like the rope in the case of the cow. Sri Ramakrishna also added to this example that when a person turns to God in spiritual practice then what happens? The length of the rope of karma increases in other words one's freedom increases in proportion to one once spiritual progress, this is the understanding which Sri Ramakrishna gives us that will can be made free as you go on clearing your mind. In fact, all yog sadhana it is to clear your mind to make your will more and more free and Ramanmarshi also gives us a very important point here. He says everything is predetermined, but a man is always free not to identify himself with the body and not to be affected by the pleasures or pains consequent on the body's activities. Those alone who have no knowledge of the source whence fate and free will arise will dispute which of them can conquer the other. The I thought is the Vijnanamayikosh will is included in it. This is from Raman Maharshi who had self-realization who always sort of shown like the son of illumination. So, the great masters Sri Ramakrishna, Ramanmarshi, Swami Vivekananda all of them have said just now in our position as ordinary people the will is bound and karmic causes will determine on in which direction it will function but you can make it progressively free through by bringing more and more clarity of mind. They are saying it spiritual practice, you can progressively make your will free, freer and freer. So, the question is actually how free is free will, that should be the question. So, now we will go a little into yoga psychology to tell you to show you indeed your will can be made free. It is a possibility in your life the more your will arises from the conscious plane the more free it is isn't it. If it arises from the subconscious or unconscious you are not aware of it look at your anger for instance when you get angry what exactly happens something pushes you towards a particular action maybe a particular bad word or a particular action isn't it and then you create more problems for yourselves you may not want to do it at that moment of time you don't want to say this bad word to your friend but you just say it many times we know what should be done but we can't do it we know what should not be done but we can't but do it what is this called this kind of behavior is called compulsive behavior I am compelled to do a particular thing. I am compelled to speak a bad word. I don't want to do it but the unconscious force is pushing me. In the character of Duryodhan, do you remember that incident? Before the war, Bheesma Pitamah is telling Duryodhana see this whole war is because of you, you have no dharma, you do not know what is right and wrong and because of you this war is taking place, you cannot stick to dharma, what have you learnt and then Duryodhana answers him it is a it is a very cold reply hettim I know what is dharma I am not inclined towards it I don't like to do it see this is compulsive behavior I know what the what is to be done ye dekhe in small or less measure it happens in every young person's life we know what is to be done we we can't do it we know what should not be done we can't but go towards it he says janaami dharmam nachame pravrttim janaami adharmam nachame nivrttim i know what is adharma but i can't resist from it i am helpless so without developing this will you will become helpless your choices are not yours so what is the solution to this problem what is the solution how to get out of our compulsions for that see I have put it in the form of a diagram again in the form of an image look at the words there usually the conscious mind is like the tip of an iceberg so will is driven our mind is like two planes one is the conscious plane is just like the tip of an iceberg underneath is a huge unconscious subconscious unconscious let's say it's almost like one conscious plane is only bit so your will is very limited the much, your will is very limited. The much of your will is coming from the unconscious which you are not at all conscious of not aware of. So, you do not know your decisions. Suddenly somebody asks you something, you just cogitate for a moment and give up give an answer because the conscious plane itself is limited. Why has it become limited? Why is there no awareness high level awareness in our mind? Because it has all got invested into negative thinking wrong wrong types of thoughts, fears, anxieties in all sorts of negativities, anger, hatred, lust all this has completely invested your your awareness has got invested into all of this. So, conscious part of your mind is very little most of it is unconscious drives, drive is a very important word in psychology, drive is that which drives you towards a particular decision towards a particular action. Because conscious plane is so limited in your mind, your will is primarily arising from the unconscious plane, where it is which is dense with unwanted thought, unwanted emotion, anger, hatred all these kleshas they are called negative emotions. It is full of that. So, mind is not at all clear. So, awareness is minimal just a bit of a strip of your mind is what is called the conscious plane, where awareness is there you are self aware. So, Isilya will is so weak, now what is the solution given? You have to increase the awareness level of your mind. Yoga psychology will tell you this basically any form of yoga what does it aim at? It is very easy to understand if you follow this model. Mind is nothing but thoughts playing on awareness. There is awareness as the background material, thoughts are playing on that. Now, you have given all importance to those thoughts. Many of those thoughts are negative thoughts. They are negative emotions and you are so interested in them, awareness is lost somewhere. Awareness itself has become another thought. You can reverse this situation. You can bring awareness to the forefront and drive away thoughts or replace those thoughts with better ones. Yoga ka matlab yehi hai. You so change the content of your mind that awareness comes into full bloom. Thought level also becomes secondary. Such a mind, a yogi's mind, not that a yogi is a great thinker, a yogi is especially a person whose mind is filled with awareness. Awareness means aliveness, aliveness means happiness. It is fully self-aware and there he brings in the thoughts he wants to think. Positive good thoughts, thoughts which are beneficial to others. So yeh state la sakte hai hum, humare man mein. If the awareness content of your mind is increased, then by controlling your thoughts, by leading a disciplined life, then what will happen? Your will, your mind, all your faculties actually will work the way you want them to work. So, then your choices, your decisions will be yours. Ye aap kar sakte ho. want them to work. So, then your choices your decisions will be yours. You see just now the conscious mind is just a tip of the iceberg. You see that the iceberg which is protruding outside the sea, but you can make it like this. You can make awareness dominate over the thought process. This is what yoga is about. It is the art of actually culturing awareness. Look at the picture. Yoga helps you culture awareness. It makes you more and more conscious and will develops accordingly. Thus, you get charge over yourself and your decisions. Training will is actually about freeing will. Freeing will from compulsions, from all the cogitations, all the negative energies zooming in your mind. It is freeing the will from all of that. So you see your will is directly proportional to your awareness. Isiliye yog ek aise cheez hai. Not that you have to do it because somebody asked me to do it. Not that the books say or mom and dad are saying. No, it is essential for your development as you are to make you better and better in any given life situation. Bring in a little yoga. Yoga means this ability to allow awareness to dominate your mind. You will see every thought you think, every emotion you think it will bring you fresh life. Otherwise what will happen is it is just thinking which is already compulsive, already full of complexes, full of negativities, you yourself will get fed up with that kind of mind after some time. When people say I want peace of mind or my mind is just I'm you see thoughts are just happening I'm not thinking because awareness is minimal in the mind you have not worked on the mind we know we are actually making science and technology out of it, but this system I never understood how my own mind works and that is why the sorrow in our lives no matter what your achievement. You know some of the greatest millionaires of this world, millionaires and billionaires of this world have committed suicide and in their 30s and 40s. Why? I cannot bear with my mind. So, do not reduce yourself to this kind of a state. You should know your happiness depends upon your mind. It is a state of your mind, it is a state of pure awareness which is available to you. If you put the right things into your mind, the mind will will function beautifully you know what decides the content of your mind what decides have you any idea what makes our thoughts our emotions what you see through your senses your exposures you saw a YouTube video. Over the whole week, the same thoughts kept coming to your mind again and again. So what decides the content of your mind? Your senses, your eyes, your ears, what they are taking in. When you eat, you pay so much attention to the nutritional content of your food. Do you pay attention to the nutritional content of your food. Do you pay attention to the nutritional content of your thought of what you are taking in through the eyes, the ears, all the senses? No, you do not pay. So, if you pay a little attention, you see mind control starts from there. If you pay a little attention, you will bring in only good content. That content can be processed very well in the mind. It will help you achieve clarity, more and more clarity. And one fine day you will see with a little meditation, a little yoga practice, awareness, self-awareness starts dominating over the thought process, which means what you are more alive, more happy happy more joyful always and thought process is very clear you can concentrate at will you can apply your mind to whatever you want at will it's not that thought is happening I can't control it I am fed up only anxiety only fear yes up cheese it's a leaking up a g1 say little bit of yoga training that is all and your will will be free whatever you want you can achieve this is what this gets you. So, work on your mind a bit this is not a matter of choice if you do not do it you will suffer for it human life has been given to us in order to achieve the highest in order to achieve human excellence. So, do not waste it on wrong thought patterns, all kinds of ah things which are useless which are not in no way contributing to your progress, do not spend energy and time on that. Invest in what will really develop you and once this clarity is achieved, your will is genuinely free, it is your own will. So, your choices are yours your decisions are yours your intent is very clear your actions will be beautiful great this is the actual secret of success in life. Otherwise you are not creating destiny you are only creating fate Some unconscious force pushed you and took you somewhere and you can go and lament there. So, bring a little bit of this into your life, you will see a lot you will be able to achieve. So, the bottom line is this, your will is proportional to your awareness. Is par thoda kaam karna hai. to your awareness we have to work on this now once you have understood this let us go into you know that is why in our culture the greatest emphasis has been given on what sanskar right? you have a question? you said that well is directly proportional to awareness and to increase the awareness we need to know what dharma is and yes, but when we are doing that, are we restricting our free will to what dharma is? See the idea is this. Yes, you see what he is trying to say is how do I know a right action from a wrong action. So then you will not say it is restricting my will. If you know a right action to be right, it actually expands your will. But now at the end I am doing only right action. Yes. The will is restricted to right action. Yes, that is what I am saying. You see when you apply your will to a right action, you can no more say that my will got restricted. If your will is towards a right action, you will feel a kind of expansion. If it is towards dharma, it is freeing the will. You will feel a sense of expansion. When you do a good deed, you feel a sense of lightness and goodness within you. A sense of lightness and goodness within you A sense of expansion When you do something bad If you lie You feel a contraction You don't feel nice Right? Why does this happen? The nature of goodness is to expand To give you more joy right from within So you cannot say I am restricting my will to a particular dharma To a particular good action It's not so When you Your commitment to goodness Rightness itself expands your will it will generate free will for you is. We are committed still to the. Yes, we will go into the theory of ethics at one point in this course we are going to go into the right and wrong of an action there further you will get light on this . Now, ah let me go a little into ok, let me go a little into some ideas which are important to you regarding free will. You see you can only proceed from your present experience ok. I do not want to give you ideas which you cannot use. In your present experience what can you do about your free will? I just now we discussed that it is possible to free the free will to attain the state where your choices are originally yours genuinely yours. For you to be able to do this let me give you some insights from Bhagavad Gita from Vedanta from Yogasutras which will help you attain this state. You know what is Vedanta? Our last course which we conducted here was on Yoga Vedanta. Vedanta is actually the SAR, the very essence of the Vedas. It is called Upanishads. What does it speak about it speaks about you your real nature it's it's fully about you how does it describe the human being just body mind what do you feel yourself to be tell me just body mind nothing more then what is conscious experience about if you're just body and Just body-mind? Nothing more? Then what is conscious experience about? If you are just body and thought? There is something called consciousness, isn't it? Awareness is one thing. Even when I am not thinking, a sense of awareness is there. In my mind you see, thoughts are enlivened due to my awareness. Which means what? There is awareness also in in me there is body plus mind plus awareness pure awareness is called consciousness so according to Vedanta you are consciousness embodied consciousness functioning through a body and mind Vedanta understand karna bohot easy, it's the simplest thing possible Only thing is you must have absolute clarity of mind Then you will see it is the simplest thing possible Just say Vedanta will give you so many clues to your real nature One thing which I will tell you, see how you can take it Your eye sense and your body consciousness they are two totally different things does this make sense to you usually we think I am the body is not it hm your sense of yourself you feel it is well I am this because my photograph says I am this , but your sense of eyeness is completely different from the body . If some problem occurs in the body you are not able to know an external instrument has to tell you an ultrasound or CT scan has to tell you what is the problem where you never feel your age unless you remember your age you cannot feel your age all these so many such clues are there which will show you You are rarely conscious of the body. Unless you are made conscious of it, you are not even conscious of it. But you are always self-aware. Awareness is your primary nature. Identification is occasional. Identification is not mandatory. If you can hold on to this simple don't have a step into your life. It is the most obvious truth of your life. You have not paid attention. What a problem this is that in our educational system, this element is not there studying the subject, studying you. It is studying you as you truly are not as you have identified yourself with body, mind, thought, emotion, whatever as you truly are, you are bare awareness functioning through a body-mind complex Vedanta tells you the same related to our study here what Vedanta has to say on free will see let me tell you this basic fact Indian philosophy does not study free will as western philosophy does in fact free will is a predominantly western concept but there are related ideas just say Kratu bolte hain Vedo me in the Vedas there is this word called Kratu it indicates or the kratumaya purusho a man is verily what his will is it indicates the will then there is dhriti in the Bhagavad Gita that also indicates a superior will hm. So, related concepts are there mainly Indian philosophies have focused upon the cognitive aspect methods of knowledge. How do we know this is what they have focused upon but related concepts you will always find. So, let us try to find in the Upanishads what is it that they are trying to tell us you see when Chandogya Upanishad is telling you you are verily what your will is the meaning is quite obvious is what you will that you are if your will, that you are. If your will is good, you are a good person. There is nothing absolutely good but a good will. And if your will, your action may be something very nice but if your will is not good, your intent is not good, can you be called a good person? No. So you are really what your will is. Many people can say sweet things. Or they can do good deeds. But if the intent is not good. If the will is not good. We don't call them good. So what is the defining factor of you being good or bad? It is your will. See how important idea he is giving Athakratumaya Purusho So if you keep your will, your intent absolutely clear, good, committed alive and elevated you can be sure of having a really good life Simple equation it is If your will is good in any action, in any organization, tomorrow in your workplace, in your workspace, in your relationships, in your family, will jo hai, intent jo hai, woh pavitra hona chahiye, clear hona chahiye, achcha hona chahiye, then your action will be good, your emotion will be good, everything will work well for you If your intention is round, you know mixed intentions will give mixed results Bad intentions will give bad results Pure intentions will give pure results Good intentions will give you excellent results Secret of success Vedanta is teaching you So decide your will. Always keep it committed towards good purposes, towards elevating purposes, towards high goals in life. This is what they are telling you. And since now you know, your will actually depends on your awareness. One of the purposes, goals of your life, Abhi se theek kar lo, will be to develop my awareness, to develop my inner world. Whatever you understand by that just now. Thoda sa yog hum jeevan mein laayenge. To elevate my own life. To free my own will. Okay. Then, you see, you know Vivekananda used to define this to be the very purpose of religion. He did not say religion, he used to say each soul is potentially divine. The goal is to manifest that divinity by controlling nature, external and internal. External nature easy to control, internal nature with practice you can control. If you do that that what will happen the inner divinity will come out awareness will come into full blossom this is the way to free will to free your will then genuinely your choices are yours there is no question about it so you see there is a way to develop a free will Don't think that if you say it, then determinism is the fact about your life That doesn't mean well, there is no other choice then You must move towards free will That is the purpose of human life You get the point? Then in the Bhagavad Gita They have extensive discussions on this Dhriti concept. In the last class, I gave you an important idea. What was it? You are your own friend or you are your own enemy. Isn't it? When do you become your friend? Are friends and are only outside? They are in the mind also. When do you become your friend?    It means if you don't train any of your faculties, you will never be your friend. Mind is untrained, will is totally untrained and emotion and thought going on by themselves, senses are totally untrained going into anything, doing anything, you will become your own enemy. One fine day you will not be able to face your mind this is when people go and commit suicide I can't bear with my mind or what to do in life so you see if you have not worked on this system you will not get much in life no matter you may get a six-figure salary it It won't mean anything to you. You may have a 40-room home. House. That is just a structure. Anand comes from within. So if this system has not been developed a bit, you will not be able to get this. That is why it is said that you can manufacture your own friend within you or your own enemy If you bring the lower self under control by developing the higher self, you are your friend and if you allow the lower self to dominate, you become your own enemy This is one idea, then it will tell you about three types of will, the Bhagavad Gita Satviki Dhriti Rajasik Dhriti and Tamasik Dhriti you know Satviki Dhriti only we will discuss it is that will through which you are able to bring your system under control because I am telling you if this system is well developed you can handle the objective world very well no matter what it throws at you what comes into your life you can handle it very positively. But if this system itself is erratic functioning in a way you cannot control then you do not know even if something good comes to you in the spur of the moment in the spur of your emotion you will throw it out of your life. Analyze your own life situations when you are in anger when you are over anxious about something anything good coming into your maybe your mother brought you a cool drink. You don't want it, you can throw it away because you are angry. So see this if your own system is not under control it's not in your hands no matter what comes from the external world, it's not going to matter to you. That's why we need to have some restraint on this first. So this is called Satvik Vritti. dhritya yaya dharayate mana pranendriya kriyaha yogena avyabhicharinya griti saaparth saatviki Through yoga, the senses, the mind and the mind-body, the one who can bring all these three things under control, through the power of yoga, that is where the satvik dhriti comes. See, this is the speciality of Indian mind sciences they are focused on the subject focus on training yourself first then you get all knowledge of the object nobody is against objective knowledge that must be there because you are here to excel in this world but if you ignore this system which is going to excel which is going to gain the highest in life then you will not be able to get your goals you will not be able to get fulfillment in life don't ignore this, you have to work on yourself this is the common message of the Indian scriptures one more thing which the Gita points out towards this what are you saying? you are doing a karma in order to get a result no one does a karma the fact that you are working it is for a particular effect, it is for a particular object in view, that is why you are working, but they are telling you don't think so much about the effects, why are they telling this, what are they asking you to detach from and what is to be detached from what, they are asking detachment is always of the will, detaching the will from the ego, this is all they are asking you to do. If you can detach your will from the ego is always a construct, it is not the original you. If you only keep working for something you are trying to build up, something which is on very flimsy ground, then you will be disappointed in life. You must build in order to excel with in order to excel in such a way that it reveals the real you, the real self. Easily they are asking you to detach detach your will from the fruit of the action that only caters to your ego examination examination if your intention for giving the exam is only that you will get a very high profile job and earn a lot of money that is not enough for you for your happiness this is what they are telling you Your intention should not be so small You must understand some basic facts about happiness Happiness is not just in acquiring it is in giving Happiness comes from within yourself It's a state of your mind. So, you can generate happiness without anything also then what is the purpose of action so, as to bring all of this for others also that is the purpose of action changing subject through objective means that is the purpose of karma. So, widen your outlook you you see people who are only working for the ego become very selfish up a pot I some people who do not want to work at all practice karma yoga at all they become so selfish they are not able to stay peacefully anywhere within themselves but those who are constantly working for others seeing that the effect of that work brings good to others they will peacefully remain peaceful even in the midst of a lot of commotion even in the midst of a lot of activity. You have seen Krishna's image in Bhagavad Gita when he is taking Arjuna into the battlefield. So, how is Krishna's face smiling? The very figure shows he is in deep calm, a very calm disposition. He is established in the perfect truth and smiling. And he is in the midst of a battlefield, urging Arjun to fight and controlling the horses with his hands you must have seen that image look at the look on his face, complete calmness this is what relaxation means relaxation is not sleeping, it means your nerves your mind is in such a calm state that enormous activity comes out of you but you remain absolutely calm. This is only possible if the will is detached from the fruit of action. That's why he says,           You understand? It is very applicable to our young people Arjun was a young man who had a lot of potential and capacity He was a little confused about his goals So, Gita is for him It is the practical manual for you to develop your will and free it The free will that we are discussing it will help you achieve a free will the philosophy of the Gita Then one more thing which I would like to point out to you is See it is the mixture of the gunas that is responsible for our actions Whatever type of action you perform a physical action, a mental action anything that goes under the type of action you perform a physical action or mental action, any anything that goes under the name of action, what is it due to? They can in some people the excellence will be at the level of intelligence, many of you are like that um the the buddhi is very bright. In some people the excellence will be at the level of physical work, in some people the excellence will be at the level of thought plane, in some people the excellence will be at the level of thought plane in some people the excellence will be at the level of care caring sharing love so ultimately you should know there are different types of activities which you can generate depending upon the combination guna combination in us. In what combination they function that decides where you will excel you understand so that is why in the Bhagavad Gita may be a which means the un is identified with the Gunas of Prakriti and so claim to be the doers all Gunas belong to the realm of Prakriti. Prakriti kya hai? We had discussed in the first class. Yes, the cosmic energy which functions in you as vital energy. So, this has various aspects. Now, if you identify only with this, only with matter, only with the gunas, you will become naturally the doer of action, but you are not actually the doer of the action. You are always the witness, through you action is done. So, aisa koi ek ek some this kind of a philosophy, you must make it part of your thinking, then you can work with detachment . So, you give the credit to something else either you give credit to God to prakriti to the people who inspired you to that work, but if you give the credit to the ego, then you will not be able to do karma yoga effectively . Karma yogi ka lakshan kya hai pata hai, he will keep on doing work without attributing anything to himself because he knows he is not the ego When your awareness comes into full fruition you will naturally have a different sense of yourself so you will not identify with the ego This is a possibility in Karma Yogi I am understanding what you are trying to say possibility in Karma Yoga. Yes. You said that we need to increase our awareness in order to expand our free will. Yes. But how exactly or what should we be doing to increase our awareness? Very good. You see this is actually a yogic question. he is asking how do we increase our awareness now if I go into that we will be missing out a lot of today's portion because it is focused on free will but let me tell you briefly here see the structure of the mind I told you it is thoughts over awareness thoughts abhi ha haara position kya hai, we think we are only thoughts, there is body consciousness and there are thoughts in our mind, we do not know anything else. Why this has happened is the awareness content is entirely hidden by our interest in the mental activity in our minds. We are only identified with thoughts, emotions, only that we feel, you see you feel anxious, you feel happy, you feel joyful, sometimes you feel lazy, you feel greedy, all this is going on. What actually yoga does for you, if you practice a little bit of meditation, what will do for you is, it so increases the clarity of your mind, you do not easily identify with thought. Then what are you identified with? You are just aware of your thoughts so ye jo awareness hai which is uninvested in the thought process which is able to see it objectively this is to be cultivated through yoga isiko self awareness kehte hai it is the reflection of the pure self in your mind caught by your mind agar mind Satvik it will reflect very well If it is dense with Tamas it will not reflect that awareness then you will ask where is the awareness? It is another thought only You understand? You must change the content of your mind to develop all this and for that life discipline, lifestyle discipline is required See, you can't do this don't say this to me develop all this and for that life discipline lifestyle discipline is required if when I say lifestyle discipline what do I mean focused activity focusing upon what you want to do avoiding unnecessary distractions having a little bit of yoga in your life a routine kind of life this is a little difficult for you I know but still as much as possible definite hours of sleep definite hours of concentration avoiding unnecessary distractions in your life focusing on the good things in your life reading, elevating literature exposing yourself to the good in life a little bit of stillness practiced everyday you do all these disciplines I will tell you in one month's time you will become comfortable in your mind you have made peace with your mind the unnecessary problems you face for which you go to the counsellor this will go out of your life. Don't create problems for yourself. Train your mind in such a way, first is lifestyle regulation. Definite hours of eating the right stuff, every day during break going to the McDonald's or going to for fast food do not do all this what you take in I told you through your senses is deciding the contents of your mind your exposures if you see elevating stuff every day the mind will get elevated it it level up this is the training which a young people require. If you do this in about one months time, you will be get the capacity to meditate which means what bring stillness into your mind, see your thoughts objectively not with identification. If you do this, you will understand what I mean by awareness that can be increased in your mind cultured augmented if you do this you will see you don't need anything to keep you happy that is your very nature it can be done, it has training, you understand in a very small way I am telling you this in fact in Patanjali Yog Sutras you will find the entire scheme how this is to be done There are some disciplines there, by following them you can get into a discipline of yoga you will see how much of fulfillment it brings into your life even in the student life try it and see and you will understand the benefits Nowadays everyone is doing it because if you don't do it you know there's no other choice you can't bear your mind after some time if you do not do it you know there is no other choice you cannot bear your mind after sometime if you do not do it. So everybody is getting into it now ah this was regarding what Geeta has to say about ah work and free will now let us go to Patanjali Patanjali makes a very important point which I want you to know Yog Sutras Patanjali Yog Sutra it is the oldest manual on yoga, on how to attain this awareness all this that we are speaking of how to actually experience that the technology is yoga, you understand the science is Vedanta, the technology is yoga. So how do you actually get into this yoga? Patanjali makes a very important point as regards our discussion on free will. He says you know the third effect of any karma, what is the third effect? Aapne do sessions abhi tak attend kiya hai. What is the third effect? Cosmic effect. You remember first is the external effect, second is the internal effect, third is the cosmic effect. Cosmic effect of karma comes back to you as Newton's third law of motion, I told you. For every action, there is equal and opposite reaction. It will bring into your life what you have thrown at others. Now, this Patanjali says this karma phal, karma shay kehte hai, karma shay is nothing but potential karma phal It comes to you as an element in your buddhi It comes and resides in your buddhi, as it were, and that buddhi decides your actions So aapki ye jo decision making ability hai, it directs that decision making ability it directs that decision making ability. It is the karmic residue of your own actions. The third effect of your work, the cosmic effect comes and resides in your this there in the commentary on Patanjali Yogasutras. The third effect of work is work throws out a cosmic effect called karma shai which will come and settle in your buddhi. So, that at any given point of time when a decision is to be made your karmic resultant is directing what decision should be made that is why your will is not free . Your decision will always be right you get the point. Now if you ask me scientifically is there proof for all this you see for this trans personal dimension of karma shai they have not found a neuro physiological correlate, but all of science cannot explain all of life, isn't it? Because you see now, if you say characteristics of a person, heredity alone cannot explain that. Karma theory explains all characteristics, isn't it? So, there can be science is still growing. Discoveries have to be taken from every realm of knowledge for you to understand things perfectly to understand it holistically So here Karma theory can make a huge contribution for you It is your own generated work the effect of your own work which ultimately comes and guides your decisions You see, like I told you about Duryodhana's case or let's take a positive case let's take Arjuna's case When Krishna told him the right action, the right path to take He did take it. He did not resist like Duryodhana Why? Because his karma was good Last class I told you the story of two boys Same circumstances, same situation each one built a different life according to your karma you build . So, you see you your life is in your hands the ultimate conclusion of this debate between determinism and free will is not the determinist determinism versus free will that is not the equation. There is you are guided by a causal chain of events no doubt, but there is one loop in that causal chain one autonomous loop you can say which is in your hands. If you use it rightly you can bring the whole chain into your hands. So, you can we can say will can be made absolutely free, free will is a possibility. You so train your system that the will starts functioning for you, your decisions are for you, your your decisions are not made by unconscious forces which you are not in charge of. Then your life is in your hands is not it, you genuinely become a creator of your destiny. Ah let me tell you see you see a little struggle is required to do all this, when I Kahan and the basic factors your mental faculties have to be brought under your control, this requires struggle anything worth having in life you have to put effort nothing is cheap nothing good is cheap please remember what is really bad is very cheap you get all this clear right now what is easy what is cheap is not good for you it will come to you just like that and you will waste time and energy on it and it will ruin you, but what is truly valuable in life you have to give energy you have to give time you have to build yourself towards it . In Vivekananda's life there is this beautiful incident you know once he was travelling in the Himalayas long trek in the Himalayas there you know if you get a ah today's situation let me tell you if you get a car ah a 4 wheeler very good you will have a fine trip. If you fail to get it you have to walk long distances have you been there I go every year to the Himalayas. So, I understand this concept ah today public transport system is quite well developed, but if you get a a jeep or a 4 wheeler easily you can make a very fine trip to wherever you want to go otherwise you have to walk long distances. And today even if you get a 4 wheeler what happens is it is a it is a vehicle for 8 people they will take 15 people . And once actually I was going and the driver was sitting here and the steering wheel was here and mountain roads and he is steering and going like this. So, all this they do and youngsters very young they are just out of their teenage years may be such young people are doing all this drivers, but anyway in Vivekananda's time which is more than 100 years back about 120 years back he was travelling he was trekking in the Himalayas and that time no such public transport systems they had to walk long distances he came to a particular slope walking walking walking he came to the slope and he saw there ah an old man who was completely exhausted because now he had to walk further and go long distances they have to walk and ah he was so exhausted and he told Swamiji that I can't move further anymore and so much more I have to walk and go. Then Vivekananda pointed out to the road and told him look brother look at this road under your feet this very road you have crossed and come till here today now it's under your feet, this very road you have crossed and come till here today now it is under your feet. So, also this road which is ahead of you will soon be under your feet do not get disheartened come with me and then the old man stood up and started walking. The point is this you have to struggle a bit to create a really valuable life. If you are easy going or given to only I told you cheap stuff you will miss the essential joy of life with courage with fortitude with dhriti you must learn to proceed. Then all this that we have discussed becomes a perfect possibility. When Vivekananda was in Varanasi, once he came across a in a temple, there is a Durga Mandir there. So, there he was actually moving about around the temple when he was attacked by a group of monkeys in Kashi they are very huge, huge monkeys even in Vrindavan you will find them. So, he was attacked by them and then he started running, then another old monk there he suddenly turned to him and shouted face the brutes, do not run away face the brutes and Vivekananda turned and he had such a strong personality as soon as he turned immediately the monkeys fled they just faced him and then they turned back and fled. So you see this is the message they are giving you face the brutes where are the brutes out there one day you will encounter them and know that yes, everything, my friends, my enemies, my colleagues, the people I respect, the people I don't respect, they are all within me. According to the sanskars we have created, our life is going to move, our will is going to function, our decisions will be made, our future will be made so decide right now whether you will be creator of your destiny or somebody will create it for you whether you will function with free will that autonomous link you will exercise or somebody else will come and create your life for you this you have to decide but this psychology will tell you how to build your life. You understand, this is the conclusion of this debate between determinism and free will that you can generate a completely free will and take your entire life into your hands. Let us stop here time is up. Thank you.
 Music So, we have come to the penultimate session of our course. This session is entitled Bhagavad Gita on self-knowledge. We are going to study something from the Bhagavad Gita and something on self-knowledge because you see this session will focus on what is the purpose of karma, Karma Yoga, which we have been studying. See if you say what is the purpose of karma, it is obviously what is called Abhyudaya, welfare, isn't it? Material welfare here, but when you use the word karma yog, yog itself means it is something higher than material welfare. So in traditional Indian philosophy, what is the purpose of karma? If you ask this question, karma yog, the very purpose of karma yog, they will say self-realization, the knowledge of the self. So today we will go a little into this what is the meaning of self what is the meaning of self-realization how is it connected to our study here we will go a little into this for you to understand what Bhagavad Gita says you see let me give you an introduction to the Bhagavad Gita first. How many of you have read the Bhagavad Gita? At least a little. Oh, everyone. Very good. Very good. So, you know something of the subject matter. It's a conversation between Krishna and Arjuna. And you know the very beginning of the Bhagavad Gita, it starts with what Arjuna Vishad. It's a very valid kind of proposition which Arjuna is making. But Krishna points out the errors in that kind of thinking, isn't it? And then urges him towards action, urges him towards the war with a selfless spirit perform great karma there in a selfless spirit and he says it will take you to the highest yoga and very many things are described in the Bhagavad Gita in fact almost everything because you know the Bhagavad Gita is actually the essence of the Upanishads Upanishadic thought Vedon ka jo essence hai the essence of the Vedas is called Upanishad. The essence of the Upanishads is called Bhagavad Gita. This is how it is described. So the Bhagavad Gita is the very cream of our spiritual literature. Sarvo Upanishado Gavo,, then the milk yielded by those cows is the Bhagavad Gita. And who is the milker? The cow herd, it is Krishna, Lord Krishna. And who is the bhokta, the drinker of that milk? Arjun and all of us. If we can imbibe the true message of the Bhagavad Gita, then all of us become the bhoktas of this amrit. It is really amrit. There is no spiritual idea which you will not find in the Bhagavad Gita. And it's a source material at every level of your life. Whenever you are seeking solutions to deep problems to existential problems to psychological problems you will find the solution in the Bhagavad Gita that is why it is the practical you can say ah Upanishads practicalized made practical for you a manual for ah personal growth and development which ah which encompasses the very essence of Upanishadic thought that is what the Gita is it is the culmination of the Upanishads and that is why it study is so very important it mainly focuses on Karma Yoga how to perform action and how an action becomes a Yoga an act becomes a path to the ultimate. So, this is the great message of the Bhagavad Gita, its power is enormous. You know how the Bhagavad Gita starts, it starts with the lamentation of Arjun in the first chapter, but the very second chapter he givesKrishna gives him the highest knowledge of the self. He raises his mind very high. Sankhya Yoga, the second chapter of the Bhagavad Gita is describing the nature of the self. After giving him this knowledge, he urges him towards action. So, third chapter is Karma Yoga. So, act with your will withdrawn from selfishness and whatever you do becomes a yoga towards the highest. So, the very sequence of the chapters is something very thrilling in fact if you read something of the Bhagavad Gita every day I am telling you your mind will change completely I read Bhagavad Gita when I was very young and it had tremendous impact on my mind so yes a powerful scripture because it is to do with our lives it is not talking of some theology it's not talking of God actually it is What is the most accurate translation of the Bhagavad Gita? action so it's a message for all of us yes yes I can suggest to you Swaroopanandji Maharaj's translation of Bhagavad Gita you can write down I will tell you at the end of this class it's a small book every day two three shlokas you can read with the translation. If you want to go deeper into it, you can take up Shankar Bhashya on Bhagavad Gita. But Swarupa Nanji Maharaj's translation of Bhagavad Gita is excellent. Ramakrishna Math publication. So something of the spirit of Bhagavad Gita you must catch here. It is very essential for our karma yoga studies . You know how many people have praised the Gita that it is such a the very essence of all philosophical spiritual thought starting from ah American transcendentalist to ah German romantics to English orientals all of them have showered praises on the Bhagavad Gita. This was the first Sanskrit work to be translated into English. Do you know that in 1795 ah 85 Sir Charles Wilkins translated Bhagavad Gita into English and it was published by the British East India Company at their own cost because you know the first governor general of India Warren Hastings he was a great Gita enthusiast he understood the message and he was inspired by it and when he actually released the Gita the very first volume in English he he supposed to have said that long after the British dominion of India ends with all its sources of wealth and power when all that is gone, the Bhagavad Gita will continue to inspire generations to come. You see it is happening today. I am so happy to see that all of you read the Bhagavad Gita. We don't need anything more than this. Now just you read this scripture and I'm telling you your whole life will be, you will live at a different level altogether and you will know how to manage your day to day problems. The essence of the Upanishadic thought is here. So it's wonderful. Now Vivekananda points out to a few things which I would like to tell you, then we will go into mainstream self knowledge in Bhagavad Gita. You see this anything powerful if it falls into weak hands you know it the whole thing can get diluted. That is why we must what the Gita wants of us is the spirit of Arjun the in fact you all are like that the spirit and capacity of Arjun he is a seeker of truth he is asking for knowledge you know knowledge will hit you if you ask for it if you are not bothered about it in pass by you great knowledge is like that. So, this is something to be sought this is something to be understood in a very deep way if you connect with the Bhagavad Gita I will tell you your everything that you require for life will come will it will just fall into your hands. Everything that you require to build a great life. In fact, Vivekananda pointed out that this was one of the greatest contributions of Shankaracharya, the 8th century philosopher that he extracted the Bhagavad Gita from the Mahabharata. Do you know Bhagavad Gita is part of the Mahabharata? It was ah in the Mahabharata and he removed it sort of from there wrote a masterly commentary on it called Shankar Bhashya today which we all use in understanding the Bhagavad Gita. And that commentary and later on so many commentaries came up after that all this help you to understand the essence of this message which is something every human being is asking for I have given illustrations of Gita many times in the midst of this course. Did you see? The idea is there in the Gita, the idea is there in the Gita. Even incentive salience, the solution is in the Bhagavad Gita So it is giving you how exactly a well-developed mind should function and what are the different paths available to us, what is the goal of human life. Yes, now you are asking what is the purpose of this life, why am I doing this, why am I in IIT today, so that tomorrow I will have a good life, why should I have a good life, what do I mean by good life, so that I will reach some level of fulfillment. What is that higher highest level of fulfillment this is what the Bhagavad Gita is pointing out to you showing you so take it study very seriously the science of human possibilities which Upanishads speak of that is given a totally practical orientation in the Bhagavad Gita so it's a science of human development Just like science has a technology Similarly there is Upanishadic thought Science of consciousness and how you can use it How you can actually utilize it That is in the Bhagavad Gita So practical orientation given to Upanishadic thought itself This is the Bhagavad Gita Now let us go into Self-realization Self-knowledge in the Bhagavad Gita. Now let us go into self-realization, self-knowledge in the Bhagavad Gita. See let me put the whole thing in a in a very short form. What basically the Bhagavad Gita is trying to tell you is through your work by following a proper technique, through your everyday work, you can reach a state of such detachment that the clarity of who you are becomes very obvious to you when you ask who am I actually what is what do you mean by human personality you think you have thought about it? How to experience it? how do I know it for myself first hand. So, this is the great search in Indian philosophies and for this the path given by the Gita is very simple. What it will tell you is do karma as yoga that is do karma yog and your mind will get crystal clear by itself. The basic effect of karma yog is it brings mind to a standstill, it it generates stillness great calmness in the mind. If the will is detached from the effects of action, it will generate a state of mind from which knowledge is very clear, knowledge of the self or whatever you are seeking will just enter that mind because you see where is knowledge ultimately it is in you many times it is veiled by the confusion in our minds isn't it it will stop that confusion this kind of clarity will come into your mind just by the proper performance of work because all knowledge remember depends upon calmness of mind. The mind is too restless, frenzied and we consider that to be dynamism. Dynamism is just the opposite of this. You see real Karma Yogis, they are very calm, collected people. Have you seen Lord Krishna's picture? You might have seen it in your calendar or in pictures of ISKCON seen Lord Krishna's picture? You might have seen it in the calendar or in the pictures of ISKCON Lord Krishna driving the chariot of Arjun Arjun is maybe frenzied in frenzied action but the picture of Lord Krishna in the midst of all that activity the horror of war, the face is utterly calm placid, enlightened and yet absolutely calm. So, this is the actual picture of a Karma Yogi. Enlightenment or dynamism is not something terrific, it is something which where your mind is in a state of complete calm and what has happened is thought activity has got arrested but the foundation of thought awareness has come into full blossom full consciousness yet thoughtless and body is doing complete work in full action the bodies. So this kind of a picture you get of a Karma Yogi from the face of from the personality of Lord Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita. So, Soch ke dekho kya, what is the actual secret of Karma then? What is the secret of Karma Yog? It is to attain a state of mind where the truth flashes by itself. Karma itself ushers you into that if you if you do it in the in the way prescribed as a yoga. It will churn and clean the mind and it will bring you into that state. It will usher you into that state. Everything depends upon finally the state of your mind. It happens in your mind, isn't it? It's a state of a very elevated state of your mind. What happens in that state? What will you understand? You see, the very fact of Think about it a little bit. I'll give you a clue here. Your mind, its modifications, its modes, you are able to observe as a witness. You are able to observe the changing modes of your mind. That itself means there's a point of changelessness in you, isn't it? Think about it. your mind that itself means there's a point of changelessness in you isn't it so if you can see the changes in your mind the modifications going on in your mind I thought of some one particular thought then a little stillness then another thought then a little anger then a little worry then again a little stillness again you are able to see the changes in your mind which means what only if you are in a point of changelessness then you can perceive change isn't it your simple physics will tell you motion can be perceived only from a point of motionlessness so the very fact that you are able to observe the changes in your mind means there is a point of stillness within you. You have to capture it. You have to dive into it. What happens by that? The foundation of thought will become clear to you. Foundation of thought is the foundation of your mind. Because you know mind and thought are the two different things. Mind is nothing, but a stream of thoughts. Mind is not another organ which is secreting thought like the liver secreting bile. No, no, no. Mind is thoughts. If you stop thought, you stop mind. Catch this. So, what happens when you stop thought, the very foundation of what you are calling mind will become clear to you, that foundation is awareness, you are always pure awareness, thoughts move in and out of that awareness. That is why you are able to objectively see your thoughts at the deepest level this is the fact about you. This you can catch if you are doing yog even if you are doing karma as yog this fact will become clear to you. Consciousness is the primary reality about me occasionally thoughts are moving in and out of that consciousness when I identify those thoughts with something, some object or some emotion, then what happens? The thought predominates the field mental field of activity and awareness gets subdued as it were and I am only identified with that thought. After sometime I get confused, I do not know what to do, I try a little yoga all this I do. But basically what is happening? I have identified immediately. If I stop this identification, if there is no identification, then I remain over as the witness of my thoughts. Yeh capacity aapme hain. Thoda sa cultivate karne ki koshish karo. It will come to the forefront. You have that capacity Try to cultivate it a little You will all the more become, get in control of the mental arena And then you can handle anything in life because everything is being handled with the mind Please see this This is given in Patanjali Yog Sutra with such a beautiful feeling See he says The modes of the mind are invariably known Because the master, the self is immutable It is unchanging, so you know the modes of the mind. So, you can use the mind as a perfect instrument to enter into the knowledge of the self. In fact, you have no other instrument knowledge of the self does not descend to you from anywhere you are the self just now identified with body mind complex. So, if you train your mind in yoga, this mind itself will unravel the supreme truth. It will come out of you. It is all it all it is all about mind training. You see just watch this slide. Your perception of anything is through mind. Hence clarity of perception depends upon clarity of mind isn't this true even your perception of yourself who you truly are depends upon the clarity of your mind if the waves of your mind which are called vrittis are constant too many and erratic perception will be affected this is what is happening just So, hum logon ko ye self knowledge ye sab thoda theoretical lagta hai. You see because of the states of your mind, if the mind is dense and turbid with impurities, perceptions will be coloured by it. So, you feel you are identified with your emotions, your thoughts, all this all the time. And, if the mind is full of complexes perceptions will be delusive. In your everyday life you see how this is working for you. So, the mind is the instrument through which you dive into self knowledge. If the mind is clarified, made clear, cleaned up, reality is always there as it is you see reality is not something you create, isn't it? reality means something which is always there that's why self knowledge means knowing what is always there you just came to know of it now, that's all because you clarified your mind now, but it is always there self realization is not a big deal No, that's all. Because you clarified your mind now, but it is always there. Self-realization is not a big deal. You don't have to bring it from somewhere. You are not going to borrow it from somewhere. Self-realization means knowing reality as it is. It is always like that. Your mind was creating all the confusion. That is the instrument of perception. You clarify that, you will see reality as it is. was creating all the confusion that is the instrument of perception . You will see reality as it is . For example, let me give an objective example . Suppose you are watching a star through a telescope , you are not getting the correct picture it is it is very hazy . What will you try to change ? The atmosphere, your eyesight, the star you will try to change, tune in the telescope. That is the instrument through which you are seeing the star. Isn't it? Usko kitna tuning karna padta hai, theek tara se dekhne ke liye. So also you are perceiving anything only through your mind if you have not tuned it properly you will not get this knowledge now focus your attention on that lake which I have given there you notice those waters they are very clear they are not turbid they are not not even very wavy but clarity have a pie what happens if the lake is like that? You can see the bottom of the lake. You can see what lies at the bottom of the lake. Your mind is exactly like that. If it is not wavy on the surface, which means too many vrittis are not there. If it is not turbid, which means too many confused thoughts and complexes are not there it will show you what lies at the depths it will show you consciousness you are always that mind is not even the reality about you you can know this clearly in so many ways but I don't want to go into that just now. You see, there are Vedantic clues. If you read all these are great scriptures like Panchadashi, Upanishads, so many ideas are scattered there just by thinking you can know. Obviously I, I, I must be the self pure consciousness but how to get it is what here we are focusing upon how to get that knowledge you must have crystal clear clarity in the mind that is the whole job the whole effort is for that is why every yoga is meant for this whether it is bhakti yoga whether it is gnan yoga whether it is karma yoga or raja yoga meditation sabhi ka maqsad kya hai to get into a state of mind where reality will reveal itself to me the truth about me will be revealed to me so this is the whole aim of every yoga When we do Karma Yoga, what happens is Karma itself churns and cleans up You know, Karma has that power It is only through action that you can actually churn up your mind, otherwise you won't even know the depths of these waters You won't even know what is in the subconscious mind, what is in the unconscious mind, only in the workplace it is all revealed to you. The anger we have, the egoism we have, all this comes out in during teamwork, is not it, in the workplace. So, that is how karma churns up and karma cleans, how does it clean? Whenever you perform action by withdrawing your will subjectively you see you are withdrawing will objectively it translates into giving up desire for karma phal. So, what happens due to that the action becomes completely selfless this itself is the most purifying agent for getting these clear waters. Achcha karma karte raho selflessly. Remember, Karma Yoga is not purposeless work. It is selfless work. It is purposeful selfless work. Your eye should be on the first effect of work which means the work should be done to perfection but it should not be on the fruit of the work. The third effect, the cosmic effect You don't have an eye on what you will get out of it Just now you think and see You are taking this course If your eye is on the credit These ideas will not hit you at all Because you will keep thinking Anyway I am getting the credit I am sitting here So what is the use of it? But if your eye is not on the credit Karma phala tyaktva If you have renounced the idea of credit Immediately these ideas will hit you Because they are talking about you Isn't it? Is this a theory? This is your truth What is happening in your This is the picture of what is happening in your mind Bhagavad Gita is the most practical scripture So you see Immediately as soon as you give up desire for the fruit of action You go into the heart of the matter This is what Karma Yoga is about This is what they are trying to tell you karma will take you naturally there where gnan will take you where bhakti will take you all these paths are there for the same goal so you can if you are intelligent enough you will be able to find your way to this goal it is possible to get this knowledge this is what the Bhagavad Gita tells you again and again. As a result what do you get see I told you the depths of the lake you are you will be able to see what are the depths of your mind foundation of thought when I use that word what is the meaning of that? It is out of consciousness that everything arises. Consciousness is the fact about you pure consciousness, even your thinking you know all of your thinking is nothing, but ah at the most you can say an adjunct ah something coming in and out of consciousness, where it comes into when a thought comes ah into your consciousness, you you say as it were I have become conscious of it. When it goes out of your consciousness, you say I have become unconscious of it. Because you are consciousness, you can stop thought and remain over. Because you are consciousness, you can know conscious thought and remain over. Because you are consciousness, you can know conscious thought and unconscious thought. Because you are consciousness, you are able to study the whole arena and understand all the different modifications of the mind. You would not have the study of mind mental science at this level, the yogic sciences basically without the truth of Vedanta. Do you see this? If you were not that unchanging consciousness, the substratum of thought, you would not know the different mentations. Cognition itself means cognition is possible. The perception of anything, the ability to cognize anything is possible because you are conscious. You are at heart your consciousness itself. Isn't it? Experience ka matlab kya hai? It is always in the first person. Because you are conscious, there is experience. Because you are consciousness itself, that is why there is conscious experience. So try to understand you are going to the very source of your being through this knowledge . There is a very huge science just now you may be just catching the ideas at some point the urge will come to go into this because this is your real identity your unchanging identity or it will keep changing . Even whatever you feel just now is your will become your permanent identity that also will pass, but this is the knowledge the real thing about you which does not change the real you you can say. It is the common denominator of all experiences the self, it is the very basis of all epistemological and ontological enquiry Any knowledge is based on this knowledge How can you ignore this? A well developed intellect can never ignore this knowledge Who is the subject who is knowing something? This is what they are trying to point out to you What is the result of this knowledge self-knowledge the usual picture you have in your mind is yogi dhyan karke bethe hain aur dhyan mein magna ho gaye uske baad kya hua last time this question was put to me by one student, what happens as a result of realization? You know what exactly you are identified with all your perception will be tinged by that by your identifications. So, if you are identified with supreme reality, the reality about you, you will see the reality everywhere. Remember self knowledge is not the termination of human experience. It is the divinization of human perception. You are going to see divinity everywhere when you realize it within yourself. Atma pamyena sarvatra samampasyati yojana sukhamva yadivadukham sayogi paramamata bhagavad which means when a man realizes this identity of himself with the self then he sees the same self in everyone because that is the truth about everyone and so he identifies with their joys with their sorrows so his only relationship becomes one of service, love, service, expansion, this will become your very nature as a result of this knowledge. That is why they say the all service activity is nothing, but worship of the immanent God, the same self is shining in all beings. You see the light of awareness in you that is the light of awareness in him, that is the same light of awareness in him that is the same light of awareness in her when it is reflected off your mind it appears like that little bit of conscious awareness which you feel in your mind but the source of that is the same in all. So you are naturally interconnectedness comes with all the perception of a yogi a unitary perception comes into your life. There is one very beautiful incident in Sri Ram Krishna Paramhamsa's life. Which I would like to tell you here. You must have heard a little about him. He used to live in Samadhi. He was such a great Yogi. In fact, we consider him to be the very manifestation of God. Because he lived in God day and night. In his life, there is a very important incident. See when Narendranath was a young man like any of you, he used to go to Sri Ramakrishna. You have heard this, right? He used to go to Dakshineshwar and sit at his feet and listen to his words. And one day Sri Ramakrishna was telling the people who had gathered in his room, Dakshineshwar mein, wo keh rahe the ki he was talking about the Vaishnava religion. And he started saying, you know, they have these kind of disciplines. They call it naame ruchi, jeeve daya and Vaishnava seva. Aap ISKCON, you will understand this They believe in chanting the name of God A kind of Ruchi, a taste for the name of God This is a very important spiritual discipline which Vaishnavas follow And then Jeeve Daya, compassion for all beings And Vaishnav Se seva, serving the devotees of the Lord. Then suddenly Sri Ramakrishna said, jive doya, showing compassion for all beings, how can you show compassion? You yourself are a bound being as the jiva, just now you are bound in the body mind complex how can you show compassion not compassion that's why it is Seva, Seva of the supreme Lord who is shining in all beings as consciousness the attitude should be that of Seva and Narendranath was the only person there who caught this so later on he gave out his in his Karma Yog lectures and read his practical Vedanta lectures, it will become very clear to you. Karma Yog service of the Lord himself who is manifesting in all beings. He appears to be in so many different forms under so many different names, but the same consciousness is being worshipped. It's actually worshipped. Karma itself becomes worshipped when you see the Lord in the other person. That is why the motto of our mission, you know, which Vivekananda created was Shiva Gnane Jiva Seva. You worship the Jiva as Shiva because that is what he actually is. The truth about Jeeva hood is Shiva hood truth about the Jeeva is the ultimate reality of Shiva. So, that you are worshipping through service when a beggar comes before you you worship the lord in him through whatever his needs are at that time when a sick person comes in front of you you worship the Lord in him through medicine when the student comes in front of you you worship the Lord in him through knowledge this is Karma Yoga So any work performed with this kind of a spirit will naturally take you to the ultimate what we are talking of self realisation, god realisation. So, you see every action is nothing, but the worship of the immanent god, do not differentiate between actions, even a simple sweeper, there were so many people like this, a cobbler, a person who is doing very humble work can reach the highest through that work, if it is done with a particular spirit. And we may be very huge executives and ah managing directors and CEOs, but if you are doing it with egoism, with a gross mind, it is it can no more be worship it will in fact, degrade you. Aki karma it can elevate you take you to the highest or it can bind you up it can liberate you or it can bind you. So, it depends on your attitude it depends on what you have made out of this body and mind have you made yourself into a real yogi or have we made ourselves into see when we talk of leadership and all this know you must be clear about it for to become a real leader a kind of charisma is required that comes from spiritual strength. Today I will go into equations of leadership also for you, but this basically you should understand the capacity for all round leadership comes only if you awaken yourself to the reality of you, to the real you. If you are living on very superficial grounds, very superficial levels with only your adjuncts, with only your upadhis that does not define the whole of you, please see this. So, if you pay a little attention to the self knowledge grow in it, you will see you will become a natural leader, you will manifest leadership qualities to the greatest extent human excellence you will attain in whatever you do. So, easily a self knowledge is very important at the student level only don't think this is to be given only to elderly people at this level only this is something which would inspire you from within and you will see you will be successful anywhere because you apply the same mind isn't it you don't get a different mind at your workplace same mind which was trained in yoga is going to be a leader at the workplace. Ek hi man hai. So, try to grasp this. In so many ways, Vivekananda has given you the very substance of Vedantic thought. He used to say, you know, Vivekananda was very blunt in his expressions. He used to say, if you cannot see God in the human face, do you think you can see him in the clouds? Do you think you can see him in images made of dull and dead matter or in mere fictitious stories of our brain? I shall call you religious and spiritual from the day you begin to see God in men and women that is the fact about the human being how can you obliterate that and what will you see besides that that is the reality about the human being we are worshippers of that God who by the ignorant are is called man he used to say the ignorant people will call man as man. He is actually God in a human form. Personified divinity actually. This is what creation is about. And Karma Yoga is about worship of that divinity through work. So, grasp this a little bit, what we are telling here. Because self-knowledge is actually the aim of the Karma Yogi Not any welfare here, that will come by the way, that will anyway come into your life You will get everything that the world has to offer Even after experiencing it, you will keep asking what else is there Then you will understand the truth of this. The reality of this. So something of this let it go into your mind just now. Self knowledge is the goal of the Karma Yogi. It is a path. It is called Nishreyas. Nishchitam Shreyas. It is not a path towards Abhyudaya. Any kind of work will bring you Abhyudaya but karma yoga is meant for nishreyas it is meant for the highest fulfillment of life so understanding this now we will go into as I told you if a little bit of self-knowledge enters into our lives your very personality will change what is the meaning of personality? Have you ever thought about it? Human personality, we use it so many times Persona You know it means mask You are functioning through the mask of body-mind The real you, consciousness is functioning through this mask of body-mind If you awaken that inner consciousness This itself will get divinized The body-mind complex You are a natural leader wherever you are you awaken that inner consciousness, this itself will get demonized the body mind complex. You are a natural leader wherever you are. The charisma to a leaderships ah to a leaders personality comes from this. You see the great leaders of the world those who have perennially been an inspiration a Buddha, a Christ, ah Vivekankananda what kind of a power did they exude? Why do we worship them even today? Because they have been able to give a quality which you will not find in just ordinary leaders they have been given able to give something of permanent value to the human life they have attained a victory over human nature which is not ordinarily available. This way they become ah all time leaders of humankind. So, this comes from spiritual realization. Now, for your purposes we will bring this idea into your practical life, what are the formulas you can draw from this? You see what is going to decide your success in life as a as a leader will be extreme courage under all circumstances, persevering ability to persevere whatever you want to attain and hard work which is something many young people today are not willing to do not that they are not able to do they are not willing to do it. So, we will study these a bit ah you see what is courage these are the 3 formulas for leadership which I want to give you. What is courage? Courage means it is a combination of conviction and action. Vivekananda used to say there are only two types of courage. One is the courage of facing the canon, the second is the courage of spiritual conviction which means if your mind is not convinced of the ideal and does not grip it, it will not inspire action. That is why courage means both conviction and action. And there are three types of courage physical, psychological and moral courage. Take the life of any leader, you will see these types of courage are dominant always present. If a man does not have this, he cannot function as a leader. Now, I would like to dwell a little upon this psychological courage. Physical courage you know what it is You have plenty of examples for this Facing the canon is physical courage Psychological courage is not something which everyone has Psychological courage means Ability to stand on your own feet and take your own decisions without leaning on anybody To stand up for what you think is right, ye courage aapko develop karna hi hai. Then what will happen you are not dependent upon somebody to give you feedback, to give you their opinions, you do not take majority opinions because you are sure of your stand. A leader who is not confident is no leader. So, psychological courage means this power of inner conviction. One classic example I can give you of psychological and moral courage in our ah today modern world is you know in that 26th November ah attacks on Taj in 2008, Taj in Mumbai the terrorist attack on Taj. Do you know the the remarkable thing is the way the employees of Taj handled the situation in that crisis every single janitor, waiter all of them Tata employees, they were so well trained each one of the them was prepared to sacrifice his life for the to save the people who were in Taj at that time. When the actual shooting took place you know many of them when many of these employees came forward rescued all the people and got shot themselves. This is what I we call courage, ability to the conviction has come into them this is my job, this is my duty at this moment of time. So many such stories are there of that day when even president Obama commented on this remarkable psychological courage has been shown by the employees and by the employers. You know Ratan Tata himself went to all the 80 families who were affected and ask them what can I do for you please tell me. He gave them huge paychecks, he made sure their relatives who wanted to visit them were flown free of cost completely. He gave everything required for those families, education for their children, even the ah the paan shop owners in that area and the vendors that pav bhaji vendors and all of them received help from Tata's. Everyone was helped it created a huge bond you know with the Tata company because of this this kind of you see this is what is called moral courage in leadership. Taking up full responsibility for whatever has happened and doing your utmost to bring solace and service to people ye disposition aapme aana chahiye life is about giving life is about doing things for others you will find your fulfillment only in this after you have finished everything all the book there is in this life you will see ultimate peace and fulfillment come into our lives only when I am able to make contribution into others lives . So, this is the hallmark of psychological and moral courage which you will find in the lives of all these great leaders . So, this is one thing which I wanted to say you know Vivekananda was so adamant on this he used to say what I want to see in young people is muscles of iron and nerves of steel and within which dwells a mind which is made of the same material that a thunderbolt is made . He his favorite expression was Kshatra virya and Brahma Tejas a combination of these two I want to see in our young people. And he used to say that is why manliness is my new gospel. Let me put it in his own words see he says the older I grow, the more everything seems to me to lie in manliness. This is my new gospel. A leader will have these characteristics. Then you look at these two sentences, they are very powerful, so I have put them there. We are responsible for what we are and whatever we wish ourselves to be, we have the power to make ourselves. If what we are now has been the result of our own past actions, it certainly follows that whatever we wish to be in the future can be produced by our present actions. So, we have to know how to act, how to act, where to act, how much to act and with what attitude to perform that action. This is what we have been discussing. Then he says nothing makes us work so well at our best and highest when all responsibility is thrown upon ourselves. See how important this sentence when all responsibility is thrown on yourself, then you will work at the highest level. When we have nobody to grope towards, no devil to lay our blame upon, no personal God to carry our burdens, when we are alone responsible, then we shall rise to our highest and best. Hai na? Aapke ghar mein aap dekho, if you are the eldest son, naturally you feel responsible for the whole family, isn't it? So consider yourself to be the eldest son for everyone in this world. Gradually you should grow into that. This kind of expanded consciousness should come. This is the meaning of Karma Yoga. That you must feel responsible for the pains of others. You must feel responsible to bring good to others. You must feel responsible to help good to others, you must feel responsible to help wherever it is required to serve. See remember love, knowledge, all this will come into your life only if there is service. Do not think ah things are easy, anything valuable in life is not easy. If you have if you can serve all good will enter into your life if you can't serve you will just bypass the good things of life they will pass by you this is the eternal law so develop this disposition now this is what I wanted to tell you about moral courage and psychological courage which is very essential for a leader This is what I wanted to tell you about moral courage and psychological courage which is very essential for a leader. Today if you go to leadership workshops, they will just skip all this because this is difficult but I am not going to skip it for you. You have that capacity, you have those intentions, you come from such noble backgrounds, you are in such a great institution and you are going to be the leaders of tomorrow. So, make sure you follow a great ideal in life. Vivekananda always said that if a man with an ideal commits a 1000 mistakes, a man without an ideal will commit 10000. So, it is better to have a high ideal in life. The next thing you must know about leadership is this capacity for perseverance. Look at this second point here. Perseverance means patience plus endurance plus fortitude plus stress tolerance. Stress under stress tolerance is what we today call ambiguity tolerance, anger management all this management studies may aata hai. Management studies talk about this. Ability to persevere means a bulldog like tenacity. Ability to stick to something for long periods of time. If you have not got this, cultivate it from now. Ability to fix your mind on something for long periods of time. Because that is my goal nothing valuable is easy you cannot be easy going remember anything of value you have to pay something for it so in in Bhagavad Gita Arjun is telling Krishna he is a young man he is telling him mind is very difficult I can't fix it on long on something it is constantly restless and Krishna says yes everybody is mind is like that but yato yato nishcharati manas chanchala he says every time it goes back you just bring it back again. This persevering attitude you must have. Constant distraction in studies, you must make the effort to bring it back. Na bore ho gaye, nahi ho ra, bas I ended the thing, not like that. You will fail if you do that. You fail in your capacities. If you stretch yourself to the highest to the ultimate to as far as you can go, it will give you peace and fulfillment, you know. So, learn to persevere. Patience absolutely required, is not it for any success, endurance, ability to stand everything. See there is no great life without problems of Vivekananda or read any great man's life. You will see they had to pass through so many types of problems at personal level, at all levels but their intelligence, their integrity it never left them because the system is so well trained they keep their balance even under very trying circumstances and they go forward so don't think I will have a problem free life I will pass from IIT I will have a big salary package very good job and I will have no problems Problems will always be there How you overcome them, that is your glory Problems come and problems go Problems are not permanent But how you face them Isn't it? Any work, there will be problems This is what I mean And you must be able to face them. Isiliye endurance chahiye bahut capacity for endurance, otherwise you will break down. Hai na? If you break down no more success. Then fortitude, you must be able to bear everything courageously and stress tolerance. Ye nahi ho toh well, definitely you are going to break down. Ambiguity tolerance, you know, it's a big thing today. In in when you work as a team, every mindset is different, isn't it? There will be ambiguity. So, there are there will be some people who you feel are simply false, but don't ever say it, don't ever mean it, do not ever even think of it because that mindset is different. If you read a little of right and left brain psychology you will understand this. Some brains think a little differently, left brain hemisphere things differently from right brain hemisphere. Within that also there are differences, there are configurations. So, remember this that not all minds will be like your mind, people will be thinking in their own ways, they have their own priorities, they have their own interests, how you are going to keep everyone together and make them work for one goal, that will decide how successful you are as a leader. And that is why stress tolerance is very important part of it is ambiguity tolerance ability to bear with the idiosyncrasies of everybody ability to bear with the special ah ways of thinking of everybody and yet able to work as a team. If you start labeling people or putting putting them away or talking against them, you cannot be a leader. Yeh samajh mein aara hai yeh bahut important hai work place mein. You must never label people. Each one is a soul in evolution developing in his or her own way and never gossip or talk behind people behind their backs that is the cause for the leadership that is the cause for the team breaking up . So, all this now you must collect all this make it your own. Anger management is another thing if you express anger no more will you be respected as a leader. So, ability to take everything into your stride It's a huge thing Actually I am telling you that is why It requires training From now on, you train your system It will be able to bear With all circumstances This is very important, endurance, patience This is not there in our children today This is the actual. Endurance, patience. This is not there in our children today. This is the actual problem. Even very young children sometimes complain of stress. Why? My system has not received any training. So a little bit of one single critical word from someone it's enough. I am flat. Can you attain success if you have such a mindset? Even if the whole world stands against me if I am in the right, I should not bother. This is strength. So if you want to be a leader, yeh sab chahiye. It's not just work performances alone not enough. What you have made of yourself as a man, that is most important. Then okay, let me tell you lighten your mood here all of you have become very serious I can see by a story why is it so important not to break down under the pressure of circumstance this is a nice story just listen to it there was a temple in a village and in that temple there was a small idol of Ek, ek mandir tha ek village mein. And in that temple there was a small idol of very beautiful image of Lord Krishna. A granite image was there. And this was a famous temple, but a small temple. Like this there was the, the image was placed in the garbha mandir and a flight of steps leading to the image. This placed in the garbha mandir and ah flight of steps leading to the image this much was the temple. And people used to come from that village from the neighboring villages everyone used to come to offer ah worship there because it was a famous temple and people used to say that the lord hears our prayers and whatever we pray it is granted there. One day what happened when it was night and the whole village had gone to sleep there was a stillness then this image you see Lord Krishna he was just seeing around he heard the steps the steps which led to the image he heard them talking and what were the steps talking, they were saying, oh, you see this Krishna image, you know, he was made out of the same rock from which we are made, same rock, we were all one rock and one portion of it was made into image and the rest was made into steps, but he gets all the worship and people step on us to go to him. So all this talk was going on amongst the steps, jealousy was going on. Now the image heard this and for some time he kept quiet all the more they were talking he is the same as us, but he kept quiet all the more they were talking, he is the same as us but he is getting all the worship. Then the image spoke, it said what you are saying is right my brothers, we were the same piece of rock, but you know what happened when those sculptors came to take and they first wanted to remove one chunk to make it into a image ok. And then what happened was they started finding out which bit to take, but as soon as they hammered you know chiseled and hammered you people broke down. So, they kept you aside to be made into steps, but one bit of rock, one chunk of it which was me, I did not break down, I took every blow, I was chiseled and hammered again and again in so many ways, I allowed them to shape me into this image. You people could not take a single blow that is why you were made into steps . I took every blow in life . So, ability to take blows and get converted into a divine image it lies in your hands this is what you should learn from this story. If you are able to take blows properly and get chiseled into a divine image. Every blow can serve as a way for you to change yourself, isn't it? If you take it like that, otherwise if you break down, you will only become the steps. So, this is a point for us to know if our endurance and our fortitude and our patience, all this if we are able to cultivate you know you will reach very great heights in life. If these basic things are lacking you you you cannot reach those heights you will not be respected for what you do. So, this is basic this part of EQ training also emotional intelligence spiritual intelligence part of all this. Then the final formula which I would like to give you is You see success is nothing but hard work minus the personalized will Initially when you begin working in your career You only know hard work The more you perform, the more credit you will get He cannot remain a leader for long. Somewhere he has put other people in the forefront, somewhere he has been able to bring more solace, more help, more good to people other than those other than himself and those around him his friends. This kind of an impersonality of outlook makes you a natural leader, success depends on that. Any you see that tomorrow when you make a great career, you can see this very clearly in your team. They will choose only that person as the team leader who is a giver, who is able to lift everybody together so the third point becomes very that is why we say personalized will should not work too much the basic message of the Bhagavad Gita is also that isn't it if you hold on to this it will affect your success in your workplace you know I can give you the classic example of again Dr. Abdul Kalam, our beloved late president. You know what a classic example of leadership he has left with us. Once when when he became the president and he was here in Rashtrapati Bhavan, once many of his relatives wanted to come to meet him because he had become the president. Some I think 54 ah of his relatives came from south from Tamil Nadu to meet him. And ah he told his secretary to make sure that ah everything the entire expenditure of their stay wherever they wanted to travel everything was recorded and kept. And you know let me well give you the exact figures you see the official rental pay for the rooms where they stayed the boarding charges to and fro expenses food trips in and around Delhi no government vehicle was used for any of this no government charge was put no government money was used for anything it was it entirely went from his pocket he spent about 354924 rupees for them taking responsibility means what this is what I am telling trying to tell you you see a real leader will be like this he paid for the entire expenses and did not allow a single thing to come upon government money because after all it is the people's money, isn't it? So this is the sign of a leader He was so selfless, just think about it He was like that himself All simplicity, all modesty and all giving all the time How much can I contribute? This is the mark of a leader a leader will always ask that what can I do? what will I get? a leader can never ask that then only you become a leader then only you survive as a leader so leadership is not about the popular picture given to you being a boss being at the top it is not just about that there is no ah special position or status thing about it. It is about what kind of a person you have made of yourself, how much you can contribute and what you can do for others . He has inborn leadership and karma yog trains you towards this. That is why karma yog is nothing, but struggle towards the highest freedom possible in human life when it is used as a means and it is the expression of the highest freedom in human life when it reaches its end this is what karma yog is. So, understanding this we will stop our session here because lot of announcements for practicals has to be made.
 Meditation is very popular, especially here in the United States, becoming increasingly popular. Time magazine had a cover story on meditation. It said OM on the cover. And many different styles of meditation, schools of meditation have come here to the West. Zen was one of the first to come in, yogic meditation of course even before that. Hatha yoga always had with it a component of meditation. Then it was Maharshi Mahesh Yogi with the transcendental meditation in 60s, 70s, and many other forms of meditation. Right now the rage is mindfulness, mindfulness based stress reduction, MBSR. So mindfulness, even little children are being taught mindfulness. I was in a summer tour in a place in my host's home. This is little daughter. When she was extra hyperactive, the mom would say to her, mindfulness, and she has about a 20 second technique or something to be mindful of. She'll sit quietly and follow the breath for 20 seconds or 30 seconds. So mindfulness is all the rage now. And it's popular, all of these techniques and rightfully so. It confers a lot of benefits. The benefits of meditation have been talked about, researched, publicized. It boosts the immune system. It generally calms down the mind. It helps you to fight stress, definitely to reduce stress. It helps in pain management. There is another big application of mindfulness recently. I remember a doctor in a conference once said that pain is, especially chronic pain, those who suffer from chronic pain, that is about 80%, 70-80% of it is not physical. It is our anxiety, our expectation that it's going to hurt, it's going to hurt, it's going to make me feel uncomfortable. That contributes to our total discomfort and suffering. And mindfulness can help us by distancing, by objectifying pain, by making it this thing, unpleasant thing but a thing. It puts some distance between you the subject and pain. It helps you to manage pain, the suffering from pain. It's been used for creativity by managers, you know once you can observe your thought processes, helps you to think out of the box. It's been used for creativity by managers, you know, once you can observe your thought processes, helps you to think out of the box. It's been used to improve focus definitely for students who are studying, for improving most of us who are distracted by those infernal devices. So definitely there are many many benefits. Perhaps I would say the biggest benefit is that it allows us to observe our thoughts, whichever process of meditation you do, ultimately it will allow you to objectify and observe your thoughts and thereby gain a little distance from your mind and thereby gain a degree of control over your mind. There is a saying that, you know, the mind is a good servant but a poor master. So you gain a little distance from your thinking process and gain a little control over your mind and don't react, you don't react as in a knee-jerk fashion which we are used to, you become calmer. You don't react immediately to annoying circumstances or difficult people and thereby you become wiser and eventually more compassionate. I think that is the major, one of the major benefits of meditation, mindfulness and so on. By the way the technique that we did was derived from a Buddhist tradition. It's a preliminary part of the Vipassana meditation. But this is not the primary purpose of meditation. This is not the primary purpose of meditation. This is meditation, the purpose of meditation is none of this. Neither better health nor curing diseases, nor fighting stress, nor calming down. None of these are actually the primary purpose of meditation. The primary purpose of meditation is self-realization, enlightenment. All the ancient traditions from which these techniques are drawn whether it is Zen or Patanjali Yoga, Transcendental Meditation, Mantra Yoga or Tibetan Buddhist Meditation or Mindfulness Meditation and so on. All of them, the original traditions whether in Hinduism, mostly these are Hindu or Buddhist traditions. They all aim at enlightenment, self-realization. Meditation is the stepping stone to enlightenment. Meditation itself is also not enlightenment. What about all these benefits? They are true. You do get these benefits, you do get these benefits, but they are like perks on the way to enlightenment. You get them, they are side effects, good effects, benefits, perks. But the point is and the end is enlightenment, self-realization, nirvana, moksha, satori, whatever you call it. That is the goal. In fact there is an interesting story about Maharshi Mahesh Yogi who came in the 70s and taught transcendental meditation here in New York in fact, that's where he became first became very popular. And there is a story that when he went back to India, one of his early visits, the other monks there, they asked him what are you doing there? What are you teaching them? You know meditation makes you younger and more flexible and more calm and a nicer person, fights aging, fights stress. Of course all this is true but this is not the purpose of meditation. Why are you telling them all this? And then it seems he said and I like this quote, he said I give them what they want so that they will want what I want to give them. You get it? Ultimately meditation wants to give us enlightenment, realization who am I? That enlightenment. Now once you get these benefits from meditation and your interest deepens and you want to know what next, what is deeper, what is higher than this, then you bring out the real goal of meditation, that is enlightenment. So enlightenment is the goal of meditation. How does it go about it? How does meditation, yoga, I'm using yoga and exclusively in the sense of meditation here. How does yoga help us in enlightenment in self-realization? Let me use the term self-realization. How does yoga help in the in self-realization? What it does is this. Yoga, meditation calms the mind. The mind which was going many ways is calmed by meditation. For example, the meditation which we just did. What did we do? We anchored the mind to the breath. The breath is continuously there. As somebody said, it's a good idea to keep breathing. So the breath is continuously there. So it's something always available to us. It's rhythmic and continuous. So the mind can be anchored to it. Anchored to it means think about, notice the breath. That's all. Pay attention to the breath. and to help you further, a sensation associated with the breath at the preliminary level which we did now they will say that you notice the movement of your belly as you breathe in the belly expands outwards as you breathe out the belly collapses inwards just notice the movement of the belly along with your breath. That anchors it further, gives you something more physical to notice. To keep your mind anchored, the mind has a tendency to wonder, you would have noticed in these 10 minutes, how many times, you don't have to tell me, how many times you lost count. To help you to think, to anchor the mind further, a count is set up. There is nothing very mystical about it. A count is set up. And the count can be, and these techniques are refined further and further. Actually I just gave you the second level of a ten level, 9 or in some versions a 10 level deeper and deeper and deeper mindfulness meditation technique. So what we did was just a little one step ahead of the first level. You count in, count as one or if that's not enough you can count one when you breathe in and two when you breathe out, three when you breathe in, four when you breathe out. So the mind is anchored by that counting. Even so we notice how the mind wanders, even when we are anchored in so many ways, the attention wanders from here to there. What meditation does, what yoga does is calm down the wandering of the mind. In fact the definition of yoga given in Patanjali's Yoga Sutra Yoga is the cessation of the modifications of the mind. What's the modification of the mind? What you just experienced, the mind thinking of the breath, the mind thinking of one, two, what was it, two or three, I forgot. Okay, one again. That is the movement, that is the modification of the mind. What you noticed just there, thoughts, ideas, emotions, desires, memories, intentions. So judgments, these are modifications of the mind and yoga is chitta vritti nirodhah, cessation of the modifications of the mind. How do they cease? You can't stop it straight away, very difficult. So what yoga does is, it first makes it focus. How does it make it focus? Maybe a mantra, maybe Om, maybe the breath, something, it makes it focus. Maybe you think of Krishna and repeat Om Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya or you think of Shiva and repeat Om Namah Shivaya. What it is doing is, the mind which thinks of many different things is now made to think of one thing and then next that thing and then next that thing. It is compared to a monkey. You know how monkeys jump from tree to tree, branch to branch. They climb up a tree and then don't climb other trees, they jump from one connecting branch to the other branch. And our mind is like that, like a monkey. It works with links, from one link to another, one thought and something else occurs to it, it goes there, from there to another thing, to another thing and so on. That's how the mind moves. What meditation does is, what focus does is, it gives it one anchor, maybe the breath. You breathe in and I say one and the mind thinks, when was breakfast again tomorrow? No, no, no, breathing in, two. Instead of going from there, then the food was really good and what will be there for breakfast, it goes that way, instead of going that way you bring it back to, okay breathing in. Again it goes somewhere else, okay bring it back, breathing in, breathing out, count, one, two, three. So the monkey instead of jumping from branch to branch is made to climb the same tree and not go to different trees. This is how yoga proceeds. By concentrating the mind on one thing, again and again and again, the mind is calmed, you get control over your attention, over your mind. And then eventually you know what will happen? At one point, the modifications of the mind cease altogether. It becomes one pointed, absolutely concentrated and then this mind thinking things, it stops. The mind is still awake, you have not fallen asleep, it stops. Then what happens? The third sutra of Patanjali's Yoga Sutra, Tadadrashtu Swaroope Avasthanam, then I, you, our real nature, the Atman is appreciated, is realized as it is. Drashtu, drashta means the seer, the seer means the witness of the mind. Swaroopa means in its own nature. Avasthanam means stays, it stays in its own nature. It is appreciated in its own nature. Swami Vivekananda gives a fine example of a lake. Just like the lake there, when there are waves, you cannot see the bottom of the lake. When the water is muddy you cannot see the bottom of the lake. But when the water is clear and there are no waves, one can see straight through to the bottom of the lake. Exactly like that when the waves of the mind are calmed down and the mind is clear, sattvic, not dull. What is beyond the mind shines forth, it is seen as it is. You see yourself, see within quotes, see yourself as you really are, as this witness consciousness behind the mind or underneath the mind, beyond the mind, shining upon the mind as you realize then I am not the body, I am not the mind, I am this awareness shining through mind, experiencing the body. Through mind and body experiencing the world, world changing, body changing, mind changing, that witness consciousness does not change. It illumines these changes. That I am. So that is realized. At other times what happens? Fourth Sutra, Vritti Saarupya Mitaratra, the Patanjali Yoga Sutra. At other times what happens is, whatever the waves in the mind, in the lake of the mind, that witness consciousness gets identified with them. Anger, I am angry, not that there is a wave of anger in my mind, I'm going to get you. No, I am angry, irritated, I am irritated, flash of joy or boredom, I am happy, I am bored. Not that I recognize a movement of happiness, a wave of happiness or boredom or irritation in the mind or dullness or sleepiness in the mind because all of these are qualities of the mind. Vritti saarupya mitaratra, at other times when the mind is not stilled, you the witness consciousness, you are mixed up with the mind. So this is the philosophy of yoga, this is how yoga works, meditation works. Even this meditation technique which we did, if you persist, the idea is if one persists long enough with it and takes it up a deeper and deeper level. I told you there are nine or ten levels to it. In some versions ten, some versions nine. It takes time. The Yoga Sutra says, takes a long time, that means not one retreat in a year, once a year, every day, morning and evening, year after year and then one begins to attain those states of mind where the mind is calm enough for you to appreciate the witness of yoga. Now the other one, the insight approach, the Vedanta approach, what is that? Think about it, this witness consciousness, is it there only when the mind is calm or is it there when the mind is active also? It's there all the time. It's there all the time. I was just looking at the lake out there and in the lake, not now, when there was daylight, you could see, when you look into the lake, you could see trees and the sky and the hill and even birds flying in the sky, you could see trees and the sky and the hill and even birds flying in the sky you could see in the lake. Now if I tell you when it's absolutely dark, if I ask you the question, when can you see the water of the lake? When all these reflections are removed, when it's dark and no reflections are there, then only it is water? Or is it water all the time? What do you think? Do you understand the question? If I say show me the water of the lake, what is this water that you speak of? You say look there, and if I say to you, there in the lake, it's just a tree, it's a forest, it's a sky and it's a hill. So no, no, no, that is water. In fact there is no hill and sky and forest or anything there, that is water where all the reflections are. If I am missing the water for the reflections, I am just seeing the reflections, I don't understand what water is. But does that mean that water is not there? Does that mean all the reflections have to be removed for water to be there? No, no, no. In the same way, what the insight, the Vedanta approach says that, even now, even without the yogic samadhi, the deep concentration, thoughtless, calm state of the mind, even without that, even when you are thinking, right now for example, you are thinking, listening, at this time also, you are still that witness consciousness. Yes, but the yogi would argue, yes that's true, but how would we know that because we are mixed up with the mind. It's a question like saying, how would we know it's water because there are so many reflections. What would you say to such a person? The reflections, what's water? It's just reflections. If I ask you, here this is a table and you say no no no this is actually a wood and this is actually wood and the yogi says when the table is smashed, powdered into wood powder then it is wood, otherwise it's a table, otherwise it's being a table obscures the fact that it is wood. The Vedantin says even when it's a table, it's absolutely just wood, when you touch it you say touch wood, you don't say touch table. It's wood right now. So because our attention is drawn to the table name and form, we think that that is the reality. But actually the reality of it is the wood because what you touch is the wood, what if you weigh it, it is the wood. Whatever is physical and solid here, it is the wood right here. Similarly, all the experiences that we have, the witness consciousness is present continuously. You don't have to stop the mind. The yogi says stop the mind, then you will realize that you are pure consciousness. The Vedantin says even when the mind is functioning you can realize that you are witness consciousness. You can use the functioning of the mind, no need to stop it, you can use the functioning of the mind to recognize your true nature as the Atman, as witness consciousness. That is the way of insight. How is it done? One way, do you understand the first way? Calming the mind down, ultimately you realize that you are beyond the mind of an unchanging awareness. But in the insight path, how is it done? Through pointers. Let me give you an example. It works like this. I'm going to show you a pen in my hand. Please look at the pen in my hand. Can everybody see the pen in my hand? Is this an experience? Is this an experience? Alright, you are seeing the pen in my hand with your eyes. Now draw your attention away from the pen in my hand to your eyes with. Now close the eyes. This opening the eyes and closing the eyes, was that not an experience? Tell me. That my eyes are closed, this is a thought. Note the fact my eyes are closed. Is that not a thought? And is the thought not an experience? What is having that experience? Who or what? In what light did that thought shine? Try again, open the eyes, here is the pen, be with the experience. I experienced the pen with the eyes. Now draw my attention to the drop the pen, draw attention to the eyes, close the eyes. That was an experience. Now I note my eyes are closed. That noting, that thought itself is an experience. Be with that thought, my eyes are closed, note that my eyes are closed and this noting that my eyes are closed, this is an experience, a thought. In what light, to whom or to what is this thought coming? My eyes are closed. Gently open your eyes again. Do you see what I mean? That one, this pen, you are seeing this pen in my hand, it's an experience. Clearly you are using your eyes, your eyes are there, that means clearly, it is appearing to your eyes. When you close your eyes, it is an experience noted by the mind, closing the eyes. Clearly it was noted by the mind. See that it's a fact. The fact that my eyes are closed is a thought and that thought is being experienced. By what? You can never objectify it, no more than you can see your eyes. You cannot use your eyes to see your eyes. Similarly, consciousness cannot objectify itself, but you can note its reality, that there is something in which my thoughts shine, This is more subtle. Close your eyes. Now there is a faint sound outside this hall which I will ask you to attend to. The chirping of the insects outside. Listen. Now focus on the chirping of the insects. What is aware of that chirping? In what awareness is that experience of the chirping happening. Slowly open your eyes. Are you beginning to get a sense of what I'm trying to point towards? It's like this. I'll quickly draw a diagram there. Do you see the difference between the two approaches? One approach is the meditation, following the breath. To make it work, you have to do it. You have to actually, you are breathing anyway, but you have to attend to the breath. You have to anchor your mind, follow the breath, breathing in, breathing out. You follow it, after some time, your mind will calm down. Your attention will become directed and focused. This one, what we did just now, it works only if you get what I'm trying to say. This awareness, this focus of the mind can be done, it can be focused, it takes effort. Distracted mind is one thing, concentrated mind is another thing. And the distracted mind can be concentrated by a process of meditation. One process is what we did just now. But this awareness behind the mind, beyond the mind, it is not to be manufactured, it is not to be attained, it is always there, it is natural, it is who we are actually. So it has to be recognized, it has to be noted, it can't even be objectified. You have to realise it as yourself. It is always there. So basically the only way to do it is to get it, what is being pointed out, to table, the wooden table which there is a movement in the form of the table. Movement in the form of the table means a thought about the table or the experience of seeing the table. And this whole thing is lit up by awareness. I can put it this way, consciousness, the big C, this is the mind, body, external object. So the external object, when you see it, what happens is your mind takes the form. This is called a chitta vritti, a modification in the mind and it has an object. It refers to an external object. It is about something. And what we experience all the time, what we experience are these rittis. Don't think that you are actually seeing Swami or hearing the talk or actually even eating food. Or even tasting food. Not at all. All that we are doing is experiencing our own thoughts. Dispute that. No materialist, not even the most hardcore reductionist will say that you are directly experiencing external world. Not at all. What happens is light is reflected on the table. It goes into your eyes. You think we see a world. We don't see a world. All that we see is light. Isn't that true? The eyes are meant to receive only light. Thank God. If the table started going to my eyes as a pen, we would be blind in no time. We would have to call 911 all the time. What happened? He saw something. No. All that enters our eyes, our eyes are meant to take in only one thing from the universe and that's light. That's all that should enter the eye. So by the time that goes into your eyes, it's just light. And that light gets modified again, it constitutes an image in the lens of your eyes. By the time the table is gone, it's just an image in the lens of your eyes. That's not what you see. That is again converted into little electrical impulses in your optic nerves and transmitted to some center in the brain. And there again, it is somehow reconstituted into the image of a table presented to your mind how nobody, not even the most advanced neuroscientists have any clue. Not only that they do not know, they have no clue at all. Dispute it, you cannot. Even the most advanced theories, and they are only theories, none of them know exactly what is the connection between brain and mind. Somehow, the electrical activity of the brain gets translated into the mind. Nobody knows how. We only know the functioning. Science, by principle, has to stop at the brain. There is nothing more that is observable there. After that it depends on the report of the person who is the subject. So, it goes to the mind. By the time we are here, we are already beyond what is observable in the brain. In the mind, the image of the table is presented as a thought wave. Memory kicks in, brings out past information, language kicks in, says it's a table, and the ego sense kicks in, says I am seeing a table. All of these thoughts, they come as this one. And this is lit up by awareness and you get the experience, the first person experience. I am seeing a table. I am seeing a table, mind. The first person experience, the awareness of it, consciousness. All that you see and hear and smell and touch and taste is in your mind. And obviously all that you think and remember and desire and hate and love is your own mind. Nobody ever directly experienced the world or universe. That's actually beyond doubt. Yes. So you can say, are you advocating an idealistic, subjective idealistic position in philosophy? No, no, I'm not doing that. But whether it's realism or idealism, whatever your position in philosophy, that has to be argued after this. But up to this point, nobody disputes it. Think about it. Who disputes it? You cannot dispute it. It's a fact. All that we experience in our mind. A monk in Uttarakhand, he said very nicely, in Hindi, I'll translate it. Shant mann mein bada samsaar kaun dekha hai? Whoever has seen samsaar in a peaceful mind? Nobody. What it means is, we think, it's a valuable insight. We think our minds are disturbed because the world is disturbing us. What that monk said was, we are disturbed because our minds are disturbed. It's not that the world is disturbing our minds. It's because our minds are disturbed that's why we are disturbed. Samsara appears to us because of a disturbed mind. We think that samsara disturbs our mind. If you have a peaceful mind, a serene mind, the same problem, the same annoying person, the same pain in the body, the same unfortunate maybe financial condition or whatever, all of that, your reaction to it will be completely different. So, the mind, that is the vritti in the mind and what yoga does is, it tries to calm down the vrittis in the mind and the vrittis in the mind calm down and then finally see, the idea is this is like the lake and this is the consciousness like the depth of the lake, beyond the lake, this will become evident. That's what the Yoga Sutra says. It becomes evident you are not the mind. Certainly you are not the body and you are not even the mind. You are not the person you thought you were. You are the awareness in which the person, the mind and body are functioning, appearing, doing their thing. This becomes evident in Yoga, in meditation. What Vedanta tries to do is, let it go on. You are experiencing a table. Vedanta asks you a question, what is experiencing this thought of the table? It should be possible even while experiencing, because this consciousness is there. Without this consciousness, this will not be possible. This consciousness has sometimes been compared to a space, a luminous space. In fact in sometimes, In Buddhism one of the terms used for this pure consciousness is the clear light of the void. The clear light is a beautiful term, clear light of the void. One of the techniques used in another stream of meditation, I didn't mention, Kashmir Shaivism. It's called the Pratyabhijna philosophy in Kashmir Shaivism. Very sophisticated techniques of meditation. In fact one of their texts, the Vijnana Bhairava has 112 techniques of meditation. One of them is this, here you have to keep your eyes open, you have to look up at the bright blue sky, at a cloudless, vast, bright blue sky, stare at it, lie back in the grass, relax, look up into the bright blue sky so that you see only the bright blue sky for a while. Don't try it right now because there will be ticks. But the technique is very interesting if you get the principle of it. The technique is as you see that, close your eyes and imagine, bring to your mind's eye the vast blue void, the shining blue sky and nothing but the sky, nothing but the sky, intensely imagine it and in a moment drop the sky. Just let go of the sky from your imagination. Now what will happen is or should happen is if you try it intensely enough, it's a way of tricking the mind. How if you have a luminous sky and the sky is the jada or insentient part of that imagination, if you drop the sky, the luminosity itself without the sky will suggest to the mind the pure consciousness behind it. So you should, it's a sort of way of tricking yourself, tricking the mind into noticing the light permeating the mind just as the brightness, the light fills up the sky. A bright luminous sky is what? It's two things actually, it's sky and light. If you can somehow drop the concept of the sky from that, what is left over is the light and you are sort of suggesting to the subconscious mind. If you drop the mind, what is left over is consciousness. That's from the Vijnana Bhairava. If you get it, it should be played, at least in concept what they are suggesting. If you don't get it, what is all this sky and dropping the sky? You had a question? Yes. it's not even a cloud, it's just like a plain blue thing. Now when you say you draw the sky procedurally, what do you see? Just like plain light or is it just nothing? Don't try to, it's something that when you intensely, first you see the sky, then close your eyes, now it's in your imagination, the bright blue sky. It's a simple imagination, vast, bright, shining sky, blue sky. Now just drop that. What will be left over, don't try to retain anything over, what should be left over is the suggestion of luminosity pointing towards consciousness, towards that awareness. Ah, empty, nothing and that empty nothing is an experience to what? To? Maybe, yes you are right, correct, right, right, right, exactly, you got it, there, there, yes, yes, you have got it. You see, it's not very difficult, it's a kind of turning like this. We will explore it more and more and more. These are the two approaches. We will explore it again tomorrow, the two approaches. We will do the meditation again and then, yes this is the time for questions. You call it empty awareness? Emptiness is an awareness. The emptiness is the mind without object and yet it is experienced. What experience is it? It is seen, it is experienced in something. Clearly it is your experience, otherwise you wouldn't be able to say emptiness. Yes. I think there is a logic reasoning example of three states and everything. You can logically understand that it is consciousness which is shining forth. But it is still within and it still feels temporary. When you sleep you don't experience it and it's also very difficult to experience that it will be beyond this body. How do you get to that infinite and permanent experience? Alright, correct. So, he asked, what's your name? Som. Som, Som asked a few questions, interesting questions. That it is, one can logically understand this, but it is very difficult to notice it and hold on to it. Not only that, in sleep for example, it's not always there and then how do you know that it will remain after death, after the destruction of the body? All of this? What do you think? We'll discuss it. I'll answer but let me give you two problems of this approach, this insight approach, Vedanta approach. Two problems to be aware of. The problems of the yogic approach are well known. If you try to meditate you will immediately see. Mind is difficult to control. The mind goes here and there. No matter how much you anchor it, breathing in, breathing out, already forgotten. Alright, movement of the belly, gone. Belly itself forgotten, movement of the belly. And then, alright at least count, 1, 2, 3, then 3 or 4, what was it? That's also gone. So that's mind is difficult to control, that is evidently a problem with the yogic approach. It's a difficult process. And Arjuna mentions this to Krishna that in 6th chapter, somebody said to me, am I doing it wrong, am I unable to focus? I said you are modest, you are asking if I am doing it wrong. Arjuna didn't even do that. Arjuna in the Gita straight away told Krishna, your teaching is useless. In sixth chapter he says, what yoga has been taught by you is no good. Why? Because it's impossible to quell the mind. It's impossible, it's like trying to control the wind, Arjuna says in the Bhagavad Gita. That's the difficulty in the yogic path. It takes a long time. The mind has to be transformed from primarily tamasic to rajasic to sattvic. Otherwise meditation will not work. And the sattvic mind has to be trained for a long time. Nairantarya that means consistent practice. Krishna says to Arjuna it is difficult no doubt but it is possible through Vairagya and Abhyasa. By systematic practice over a long period of time and also by dispassion for that which ties you to the world. That has to be cut down. That's the yogic path. The difficulties are well known, the solutions are also well known, though difficult to implement. Now in this insight path, the difficulty is subtle and the solution is also subtle. The difficulty is this. When one begins to understand what this path is talking about, the path of Vedanta, the path of knowledge. One gets the sense that it is first of all effortless, because something is there. What effort do we have to do to convert this table into wood? What effort? Nothing. You have to recognize it is wood. That's it. That's all. Effortless. The second thing you sense that it is instantaneous. The moment you get it, you've got it. That's all. Effortless. The second thing you sense that it is instantaneous. The moment you get it, you've got it. It might take you time to manifest it and so on but getting it, stumbling upon it, recognizing it, instantaneous. So these, no doubt these are the advantages. In one sense it is effortless and it is instantaneous. But these two are obstacles also. What happens is it leads to a kind of passivity and laziness. Not doing anything. So I need not do anything my meditation mat in the morning and in the evening and practice yoga. Not at other times, not possible. One of the Brahma Sutra says, which means it is possible while seated. So you can't, there is a way of walking meditation but it is not commonly done. So yoga is a particular practice. Your body has to be in a particular position, your breathing has to be in a particular position, your mind has to be focused on something. Yoga requires that. But the way of knowledge is open at all times. Whether you are walking, drinking, talking, whatever you are doing, you can use it. I asked you to note the sound of the chirping of the insects. Right? Now, in yoga practice, that would have been a distraction. Suppose, it's not so loud here because the windows and doors are closed. If you open it, it's loud. Now, if you are trying to focus, om here and then that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, loud. Now if you are trying to focus, Om here and then that sound comes all the time. You think, oh I have to bring my mind back here, Om and then that sound comes. In yoga it's a distraction. In the path of Jnana, you know what would be done? You note that. It's disturbing you, focus on that, because the object is not important. Use that to become aware of that which is aware of that sound. Anything can be used to turn inwards, anything. Anything can be used. I remember I did it actually, one of the most annoying things, I don't know about you, but a crying baby on an airplane. I thought let me try it, let me see if this is the test, if it works here it will work anywhere. And I am telling you, I had deep meditation. It's such an incessant loud and annoying noise, if you focus on it you can't mistake it. And if you just link it to what is aware of it, immediately, deep meditation, mind immediately becomes calm. Because whatever is disturbing the mind is now pointing it back towards its real self. You can do it. But then this path demands continuous engagement, not one hour in the morning. So these are the two dangers of this path. It seems instantaneous and effortless, that's one. Another danger of this path is theorizing, conceptualizing. Because it is using the intellect to understand something, the intellect would like to have answers. And it will get answers. And there is all that we learnt in Rig Vrishya Viveka and Aparoksha Anubhuti and Panchadashi and so many, if you have been listening to the talks, there are answers, a whole structure is set up and answers to many questions are given. And all of them are good provided they all point you back towards what's right there, right now. The tendency of the mind is, the intellect is, here is my question, ah I got the answer, finished. Not finished, now look inside again. Yes, that is why this retreat, the other classes which I have given and I will continue to give over the months and years, they give you the teaching. But here we are trying to employ the teaching to go inwards. Alright. Let me try quickly to respond to your question. You have a question? Yes, hold on to that. Let me answer your question. Remember two problems I've given you with this path of insight? One is that it seems to be effortless and instantaneous. Practically, it is not. It demands constant engagement. Second thing is, there is a tendency to philosophize, theorize, intellectualize, conceptualize which is good but it should not stop there. I had a question, I got it. There is a book, I have read it. And that's it, I have read it, I know it. No you don't. You have the words but you don't know what the words mean. The great philosopher Wittgenstein, I remember, there is a very nice story about him. Whenever he would teach, and the next day, next class, if somebody said Professor you said this, he would immediately deny it. He would say no, no, I didn't say that. I said this. And one of the students wanted to catch him at this and he wrote down exactly what Professor Wittgenstein had said. Next day in the class he said, Professor you said this, no no I didn't say this, but these are your words, exact words, I have noted them down, you said this and he said yes but those words don't mean to you what they mean to me. There is a point, that is the thing, What the teachings of Vedanta, what they mean to an enlightened person, they don't mean to us if we have not actually made the breakthrough. So that's why we must not stop at theorizing, must not stop, be satisfied with answers or with the books. Now your question was, it seems logical, rational, what is being mentioned, at least it is possible. Here I want to stop you. I want to say first of all, it is not just logical or rational, I would like you to notice it. Not just as a possibility, not just as an intellectual conclusion, but as a reality, as real as... Let me ask you, this pen in my hand, is it a possibility, a theory or a fact? Your eyes are seeing this pen, theory or fact? You don't seem to be convinced, maybe you're sleepy. We'll continue this a little more, because there are one or two questions to deal with. Fact. Your eyes are seeing this. Fact or? Not fiction, but it is a fact. You close and open your eyes and you note it with your mind. My eyes are closed, my eyes are open. That is fact or theory? And that thought, my eyes are closed, that is experienced in you the awareness, fact or theory? You are saying it because you expect me to, you think I expect that answer. If you can say that it is fact with conviction then I would advise you stay with that fact, try to appreciate what it is. That is shining upon your thoughts. It is something prior to your thoughts. Thoughts come and go, that stays. It is that which makes all experience possible. Seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, right now, every bit of your experience is because of that. You say, no, no, no, I know, I know, go on. No, not go on, stay with it. If it is a fact, then you have already got it. Now all you need to do is to appreciate what you have got. If it is not a fact, most people would say it is not a fact, yes, mind I understand, but witness of the mind, pure consciousness, it is something that I have to realize, I have to become enlightened about it. Vedanta insists it is as much a fact as this pen in my hand. In fact this pen in my hand and your eyes and your mind, all of these are dependent facts. That's an independent fact. It's because of these all the rest is revealed to you. It's something that you have to grasp to see that yes it is so. Once you have grasped it, then the rest becomes easy, you can work it out yourself. So what about sleep? What you are talking about is the memory of an experience called sleep. Was it there? It must have been there, otherwise how can you even speak about sleeping? Do you admit it is there when you are dreaming? Do you admit it? That awareness must be there when you are dreaming? It should come out, yes obviously, otherwise how can I dream? Some awareness must be there. So it is there in waking, it is there in dreaming. Now when dream sees blank Some are already going into the blank. When I talk about this, there is a natural tendency to look inwards and see that's good. So in that case you are welcome to close your eyes and look inwards and see. If you are feeling sleepy then don't close your eyes, open your eyes and listen. I'll ask you just one point, you can discuss it later, but I'll give you just one pointer. How is it that we are able to talk of the experience of sleeping if it was not an experience? If we did not have some kind of experience of deep sleep, you know what would be our report? I was awake, I went to bed, I had some vague dreams and I'm awake again. I had deep sleep, dreamless sleep, I slept like a log. Every language, in every culture in the world there are phrases similar to this, which report deep sleep. How would we report it? Otherwise we would have just reported nothing, blank. Death. How do I know that the consciousness continues after death? You know where this question is coming from? Already I have made it axiomatic that this body is real and this body and brain are generating consciousness and if this body dies, how do I know consciousness exists? But let me ask you from your own first person perspective, are you a body experiencing awareness or are you awareness experiencing a body? Yes. In principle then, you could be awareness experiencing the absence of a body. Every day you do that in your dreams. In your dreams, your physical body is on your bed and sleeping. You are completely unaware of it. You are imagining a different place, dreaming a different place, a different body, different events. Now your consciousness, awareness continues with a different set of imaginations and has no reference to your actual physical body sleeping on the bed. That means in principle as a first person experience it could go on without your physical body. It's only we think that it has been generated by this physical brain, that's why we think it's rooted to this physical brain. If this is destroyed, you will say, if the body is alive, that's why you are dreaming. If the body is dead, you will not be able to dream. But that's already assuming. That's not your experience. Your experience is I can dream without reference to my waking body. Question? For me, the blue sky. Example. Oh, you are stuck with that. Drop it. Yeah, tell me. Minds drive everything that we do. Yes. So this example of the technique that you're teaching us is to create that daylight between what we perceive as the mind and the consciousness that is right there. So when you say drop the mind, it still means not, you know, like, not thinking. True. So then all the thoughts have to go away in order for us to know what shines. True, true. Yes, it's a way of tricking the mind into that. It's actually a tantric way. It's in the Vijnana Bhairava. See, yogic way is a way of controlling the mind. What we did, the meditation with the breath. The Vedantic way is using the intellect to see through, insight. This meditation what we did, it's more of like a message to the subconscious to get it when you drop the mind, it's like a vivid experience. It's like an aesthetic experience which suddenly catapults you to that. It's not exactly controlling the mind, it's not exactly intellectualizing or trying to get an insight, it's taking a backdoor entry into it. There are two ways. For example, see how the mind works. Note how the meditation techniques I gave you, how they worked. I told you to sit straight and close your eyes, how to place your hands, how to breathe and then what to concentrate on. A linear set of instructions, one, two, three, four, five, six. That's one way of doing it. There is another way, the tantric way which works through the subconscious mind, the back door of the mind. You know what it goes like? It goes like this. You've seen that hill there outside, across the lake, that mountain? I'll tell you, sit like the mountain and breathe like the wind. Whatever that means to you, do it and you'll see. The mind understands. It's not the logical mind which listens to it. It's a kind of aesthetic experience. Sit like the mountain. Imagine that you are the mountain. How does it sit? You'll see. The meditation will be very deep. That's the back door to the mind. Yes. It would seem so. Awareness means two things. Good point. Here there are two things. There are two kinds of awareness, I will take it up tomorrow. Two kinds of awareness. One is this one which we are familiar with. The awareness of seeing, hearing, smelling, talking, touching, tasting, thinking, remembering. This is all that we are aware of. So all of this is consciousness plus mind. Consciousness plus mind. Will this kind of awareness continue without a brain? That's the question. And Vedanta would say no. No. Without a brain, with a physical body diet, awareness sort of curls up into itself. Like a deep sleep experience. Like a deep sleep experience. Maybe something that happens in deep sleep or coma or something like that. Where consciousness alone exists, but there is nothing for it to experience. Because the instrument for experiencing is no longer functioning. It's still there. It's curled up. When it gets a new body and brain, it will start working again. Nowadays we can understand it very nicely. We download information technology and all. All your data is uploaded. Your laptop crashes. Your laptop crashes. All your data is still in the cloud. But you can't access it, and you can't do anything. Until you get a new laptop, you get called back again. This one works much better. In Vedanta, they will say, it's not that you memorize the Gita in this life, and next life you remember the Gita. Not likely. But what will be continued will be, according to Vedas, according to Hinduism, Buddhism, those who believe in many lives, what will be continued will be a set of impressions, tendencies, capabilities, capacities. In some rare cases, actual memory may be transmitted. But actual memory is very difficult to transmit. I mean, it's still there. According to yogis, Patanjali Yogasutra says all the memories are still there. But we can't access it. I mean, how much do we remember? If I ask you, what did you eat now? You'll say, yeah, I did, maybe you didn't tell me. I ask you, what did you eat this time last week? Last year? No question, I'll remember. How many of your memories do you have from when you were 2 years old? Nothing. From when you were 6 months old? Nothing. So what about past life? Just imagine going through the trauma of a death and whatever lies in between and the trauma of a rebirth. So, to answer your question, dysfunctioning awareness. There are names for this. The mind will not function without a brain. No more than the data you have got, programs, apps, you have got will function without a computer itself. But consciousness, awareness itself, pure awareness, there the question of functioning doesn't arise. It's not something that is functioning. It is ever there. It's a shining force. It's a light that is ever there. It's not doing anything. This one is doing. It's an action. Thinking, seeing, hearing, spelling. You can actually see it working, turning away. But this one is just shining force. This plus this is what we call our functional awareness, the briefness which we have. The pure consciousness itself is our DXF. That can continue, that's what we are saying, it can continue without the brain also, because it's not dependent on the brain. Even this is not dependent on the brain, but this mind uses the brain to become active. It will not work without the brain. I think we'll bring it to a close. Yes? You asked me to remind the story of the beginning. Funny story. I don't know how many of you are in. I think we should end with a funny story. Yes, tomorrow is a long day ahead. So we will focus. But let me just share this story. I mean, I heard that there is a house called Panini here. The funny story is actually about Patanjali, but it starts with Panini. Panini is the ancient Sanskrit grammarian. So if you study Sanskrit grammar, you have to study Panini. And I remember that when I first came to the United States, we were driving along to which city? I forget. Maybe Los Angeles or somewhere, and I saw a little shop that says Panini. And I said, look, this. And before I could say anything, another person who was in the car understood what mistake I was making. I said, no, no, no, Swami, it's not Sanskrit grammar, it's bread. It's Italian bread. But the funny story concerns Patanjali of yoga fame. Patanjali yoga. He wrote the classic manual of meditation, Patanjali, the yoga sutras. But in ancient Hindu mythology, Patanjali, the founder of the yoga system, is said to be an incarnation of Shesha Naga. You know in the iconography Vishnu, he lies on this bed, his cosmic bed which is a thousand headed serpent, the cosmic serpent Sheshaanaga. Vishnu is a bit of a couch potato. He lies on that bed and Shesanaga is this cosmic serpent. Patanjali is said to be an incarnation of Shesanaga and he is said to have given three boons to humanity. Medicine for the mind, for the tongue and for the body. So he is the founder of the system of meditation, medicine for the mind. System of Sanskrit grammar, that is medicine for the tongue, means for the speech, so they can speak Sanskrit correctly. And medicine for the body, he is the patron saint of Ayurveda. The Ayurveda system is descended from Patanjali. So he has given these three systems to us. The story concerns grammar. The sutras, you know the systems of knowledge in India, they were codified into sutras, little aphorisms. The Yoga sutras for example. Now the grammar also is codified into the Panini Sutras. All of Sanskrit grammar can be understood by studying the Sutras. But they are incomprehensible in themselves. They have to be explained and the explanation was written by Patanjali. So Patanjali is known as the Bhashyakara, the great explainer or the commentator on Panini's Sanskrit grammar. Now the story concerns Patanjali and his explanation of Sanskrit grammar so this is how it goes. Patanjali used to teach his great commentary called the Mahabhashya great commentary on Sanskrit grammar. He had 1000 students and there would be a big hall and a stage, like the stage back there he would sit on the stage and he would teach but his rules were that when he taught, the curtain had to be drawn, had to be pulled it would be covered and he would teach from behind the curtain and everybody loved the lessons, they thought he's talking to me, he's solving my doubts he's answering my questions. It was wonderful. It was like he was speaking to each of these thousand students individually. Now, of course, students being students, they are mischievous everywhere. One of them couldn't contain his curiosity. So he thought, what is going on? Why is the old man hiding behind a curtain when he is speaking? Let me see what goes on there. And so when the class was going on, he crept up to the corner of the stage and he lifted a corner of the curtain and he looked inside. And to his... he was stunned and amazed and terrified. What he saw was not a stage, it was the entire cosmos, stars and galaxies and covering everything, this terrifying, gigantic serpent with a thousand hoods spitting cosmic fire, the fires of cosmic dissolution. And of course he fainted immediately when he saw that. He fell back and the curtain also fell back in place, a little corner, but one spark of that fire, the cosmic fire of dissolution had escaped from the corner of that curtain and that was enough to reduce all the students to ashes. They were burned to ashes. And Patanjali immediately regained his human form, he pulled the curtain aside and he jumped out of the stage crying, alas, alas, I am undone. Not because the students were burnt, he said, who is going to learn grammar now? At this point, one boy comes into the hall and says, sir, may I come in? It's my theory that he had gone out to the restroom break. So somehow he was not in the hall when this disaster unfolded. Patanjali rushes and embraces him and says, my boy, you are my treasure, you are my all in all, because he is good at spreading grammar. He transfers all his Mahabhashya, the great commentary to him and the story doesn't end there. This boy learns and then he compiles all of them notes into this. You know, they had palm leaf notes. And then he takes leave of his guru, his master, and promises to spread Sanskrit grammar for the welfare of everybody. And he's on his way to his village where he will establish the first grammar school. He takes a nap under a tree because it's hot and keeps the bundle of notes there, palm leaf and there's a goat who is chewing the grass there and he notices the juicy leaves and he starts coming and he starts chewing the notes, the leaves and this boy gets up in horror and he sees what's happening and he shoos away the goat but the damage is done, a part of the leaves are gone and that's why to this day a part of the great commentary of Patanjali is not available and it is called, that portion, the missing portion is called Ajabhaksita Bhashya, the goat eaten commentary I'm sure at some point it must have been lost or misplaced and so now you have this nice story to back it up. Very good, let me end with a peace chant. Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare Hare hare hare hare Hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare hare you
