 Music Today is the concluding session and we are going to discuss the essence of the Bhagavad Gita. Last class I had two interesting questions after the last session. One was which Bhagavad Gita should we study. For that let me just mention two books here. One is you can take a small volume Bhagavad Gita by Swami Swaroopananda, Ramakrishna Math publication. It is very concise, not very big book and very good translation into English. And the other one is if you have the time, it is in three volumes, Universal Message of Bhagavad Gita by Swami Ranganathananda, Exposition of Gita in the Light of Modern Thoughts and Modern Needs. This is a remarkable book. It is in three volumes. So, in your holidays or something like that you can go through it. The second question which I received last time was very interesting. Somebody asked me how exactly karma leads to purification of mind. We keep saying karma yog bohot necessary hai because it clears the path to whatever you want to attain. How exactly does this happen? So you see, at one point we had discussed from where does the human will arise. Karma has to do with, work has to do with exercise of your will, is not it? It is an expression of your volition. From where does that volition arise it arises from the vijnanamayikosh the higher intellect so to say because the will is a compound between consciousness and the intellect. So, because it arises from there as you keep exercising that will in the right direction the vijnanamayikosh remains active as it were. You understand you are not just body conscious not just mind conscious you are working from a higher plane it ushers you into the Vijnanamayikosh as it were. Karma Yoga hm if you are working consciously in a specific manner in a directed manner with will withdrawn from personal gains the Vijnanamaya Kosha will remain active so you are very close to the truth of your true being this is how Karma Yoga actually churns and cleans up the mind and helps you attain the higher goals of life. So you must understand how it it is all it is a sort of graded path that is why which is given to you in order to attain whatever you want to attain in life. Now one more thing which you should know is, before I go into the essence of Bhagavad Gita, see when we talk of consciousness many times I have told you this, you are essentially consciousness functioning through a body mind complex. So, you can say this consciousness factor it is the static aspect of the self, but the will becomes the dynamic aspect of the self is not it because will you are exercising you are actually your will when you exercise it, otherwise you are of the nature of pure consciousness. So, your own static and dynamic aspects are being described as pure consciousness and as will. This is one thing you should know. Another thing is as you go on exercising your will in the right direction, you develop your effective faculty. So, you are developing all your faculties, your intellect, your effective faculty and your volitional faculty. When all these faculties, you know these are the three basic faculties of the human being, thinking, feeling and willing, is not it? Your own basic faculties. When all these three work in harmony, they work in sync, then yoga becomes possible. Transcending body mind complex which is the goal of all sadhana, it becomes possible when your three basic faculties are working in sync. So, this is how karma yoga helps you naturally evolve towards higher realization. Try it and see in your own system or the entire experimentation is here you see try it and see if you work in a particular way with a particular attitude and a work which is oriented towards doing good to others with a detached will. It will create a particular ambience right within you it will usher you into the state of yoga. Today when we go into the essence of Bhagavad Gita the art of concentration there I will give you a short meditation also because as you meditate karma yoga becomes easier you know they sort of complement each other. None of these yogas is a compartment in itself because we have all of these faculties, we sort of combine, harmonize all the yogas. Jab aap karma karte ho, you should try to make it into Karma Yoga. When you are full of emotion, you must try Bhakti Yoga. When you are full of your rational faculty just thinking you must try jnana yoga these are all your own faculties. So, you can apply any yoga actually if you make a higher goal ah basic to your life the purpose of your life then naturally whatever you do you will want to convert it to a yoga. So, you have a choice of all of these and you can harmonize them. In fact, harmony of yogas is very important. It is not that a Karma Yogi is just a Karma Yogi. It is not like that. Is not it? Many times we discuss this that he is doing his duty out of love. That is when you will enjoy doing your duty. So, the effective aspect is there. So, in a way you must try to harmonize all your faculties so as to achieve transcendence what we we are calling transcendence which means the higher realization. So, Geeta ka yahi updeshe. Yes. In all the lectures like. Yes. Past also. Yes. You you said that we should detach. Yes. We should detach our whatever it is from the result or from the will or. Yes. We should work with detachment. So, how do we do that? Yes, you see that comes only by practice, even what exactly it means detaching the will, nobody does purposeless work, is not it? Everybody when you work, it is purposeful work. What they are telling you is you do purposeful work, but you do selfless work. The detachment of the will means the effect of the work is not just for my ego. As you grow up, you will see there are many people who are in a sense working for their egos mainly, such people flop as leaders. If you are working the purpose of your work is generating good in your workplace for others which means actually in your workplace what will happen? The employer employee relationship gets very refined by such an attitude, is it not? So, you become a natural leader, you are boosted up as a leader. Samajh mein aara hai? A personalized will will not take you very far. That is why last time I gave you the equation success is equal to hard work minus a personalized will. You have to depersonalize your will which means what the entire life force is dedicated to bringing good to others to the people around you and as a result you become the natural leader. As you work with ah people you will see this is pretty obvious, team spirit ka matlabhi hai ye, organised work ka matlabhi hai aise hona, creating a will which is naturally it it has motivation only towards others, a socially oriented will that ensures your success, this is what I mean. Now, let us go into one more thing which I would like to mention here. You remember, I had shown you this particular slide in the first session. Now just pay your attention to this slide. See this is basically Sankhya psychology which tells you reality is twofold, Purusha and Prakriti and everything that you are working through the instrumentation of your body, mind, everything about the mind, these are all evolutes of Prakriti. Karma Yoga fits very well into this kind of a dual framework. Sankhya and Yoga are both dual philosophies. They believe reality is twofold Purusha and Prakriti. But please see Purusha is separate from Prakriti. And everything falls under the realm of Prakriti. So, what Karma Yoga is advising you is, now this is our present state, we know we are it is through the through your body and mind that you function, but in a way you can intuit that you are not just body and mind, they are like instruments through which you are functioning. So, then how do I utilize these ah evolutes in order to augment my evolution this is what karma yog is about isn't it. So, thinking deeply itself will help you understand that indeed the real self the real me is separate from prakriti enquiry is called ah vedanta vichar is called through enquiry you can find out that the real I cannot be all these changing evolutes. In fact, Vedanta does not even give ontological primacy to mentality to mind action because that is also changing. You see all this ahankar, the five cognitive senses, karmendriyas, jnanendriyas, mind with all its faculties everything falls under prakriti. Now, the karma yoga is the art of using these faculties, using prakriti in order to go to the realization of the purusha. If just through enquiry you get it wonderful, but if you do not get it by that you must have the maturity to work your way out, is not it and that is what Karma Yoga is about. So it is the art of working in such a way you understand the truth about yourself, the goal is self-realization and this is you can use karma as a very powerful means towards that. That is why you know in the Bhagavad Gita it is said, guna guneshu vartant the actual shloka is prakriter guna samudha sajjante guna karmasu which means deluded by the gunas of prakriti people attach themselves to the functions of the gunas. Prakriti has all these gunas through which it is functioning through your body mind mechanism. We attach ourselves to all these functions, we feel we are the doer of the action, but just think of your own physiological activity. Are you ah directing your heart to pump blood? Is the heart beating with your permission tell me or is the blood flowing with your permission? Not at all, it is going on by itself. In fact, if medical science did not tell you these are your organs and this is the work they are doing you would not even know. Is it not? What does it mean? The work of nature is going on, the basic thing about you is only self-awareness, but you are using the instrumentation of this body and mind to manifest that self-awareness. Hain na, yahi such hai na, iska matlab, think a little and you will get the point. So what is Karma Yoga trying to tell you, you you so handle prakriti in nature, you so train your system that you are able to get the knowledge of the self just through karma, just through action, um and they will really become your instruments, very obedient instruments, if you can train them in that manner. So, this is a constant refrain in theBhagavad Gita that prakriti is doing all the action not you. So, your sense of doership you must think about it a little a little deeply hm. Apne upar hi research hai ye, aap soch ke dekho. Everything all the evolutes of prakriti are in constant flux. So, then what is your identity about if it was just prakriti you are just a collection of changing things, but Vedanta will tell you no you are actually the purusha functioning through the body mind complex. So, iske bare mein socho this is all I want you to do at this moment of time. I will teach you very simple small meditation which will help you understand these things a little better. Kyuki may be this is your first introduction to Indian philosophy, is not it? These are this is a basic sankhya psychology which we use in all systems of Indian philosophical thought. That is why I have put it here in karma yog. Now what is it what is the message that Bhagavad Gita the essence of Bhagavad Gita we are going to discuss what is it trying to tell you again and again you see the basic lamentation of Arjun was I do not want to kill my people I do not want the throne I do not want to fulfill any ambition killing my own kit and kin and what is the advice being given to him, the very first advice that was given to him is he Krishna raised his mind very high, he took him straight to the level of self knowledge and told him who kills whom, what is being killed, ye bhi thoda soch ke dekho, what is death? If you are consciousness itself, what does death mean? It is just fall of body, is not it? And Krishna tells him that I have already slain all these people who need to be killed. Nimitta matra bhava savya saachen, you just be the instrument now. Through the instrumentation of your body and mind, Prakriti will work. The divine force will work and have its work done. You just be the instrument and that is why he gives himself knowledge. Your own reality is neither that of the slayer nor the slain. What does he say in second chapter? The shlokas are very beautiful. You must listen to a few of these shlokas because they are very powerful and the original Sanskrit you must get acquainted with the words see he says uhhh achchhe dhiyo yam adahiyo yam akhle dhiyo ashoshya evacha nitya sarvagata sthanur achaloyam sanatana this is your real nature being described. Nainam chindanti shastani weapons cannot cleave or cut the self which you truly are and fire cannot burn it, water cannot wet it, air cannot dry it, it is not material substance is not it, it is consciousness, none of these can touch it, ached yoyam it is uncleavable, it cannot be cut by anything, adah yoyam it cannot be burnt by fire and then it cannot be dissolved by water, it cannot be blown or dried by air because it is Nithya, eternal, Sarvagata, all pervading, Sthanu, immovable, Achaloyam, it is constant, ever present and Sanatana, everlasting. This is the nature of the soul which you truly are this is your definition so he raises his mind to that level gives him that experience that knowledge and then that is why the third chapter is Karma Yoga so go ahead and do your duty being an instrument in the hands of the divine so you see this is a message being given out to all of us Kabhi Kab Kabhi aisa hota hai, we are confused about our duty, what should I do in this particular situation, you must do what is right for you to do in that particular situation, does not matter towards what and what kind of action that is. This action which Arjuna performed was actually for loka sangraha, is not it, it was to bring peace to the world, if Duryodhana's reign in the world, what will the world be like? So the purpose of the divine incarnation is to show man his duty and that is why he says you just be the instrument in my hands and go ahead and do your duty. So you see this is the eternal message of the Bhagavad Gita, do your duty, do your duty, do your duty does not matter what, by doing your duty you worship the highest lord that is worship of God, according to your identification I told you, your duty is decided. Just now you are a student, tomorrow you will will be engineers you will be in very high leadership positions you will be in managerial duties you will be CEOs of companies. So, at that time be absolutely devoted to your duty in any particular context this is what should strike you your duty is what you are going to carry further on with you. आपका ज़्यावाद आपके लिए ज़्यावाद करें जाएं जाएं जाएं है न कर्म ही हमारे साथ जाता है और कुछ हमारे साथ जाएगा तो ज़्यावाद करें जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं जाएं � But that duty should be performed with a particular state of mind. If you do it in a state of frenzy or anger or hatred, loke kehte hain with passion you must do duty, but the Gita will tell you in tranquility you must do your duty. The mind should be tranquil. There are many verses to this effect. The mind should be in the state of yoga, then the karma you do will become karma yog, you understand, the mind should be trained in this. Lord Krishna says, let me give you this particular verse, Prasade sarva dukkha naam haani rasyo pajayate, prasanna cheta sohyasu buddhi pariyava tishtate, which means on attaining tranquility, you not just put an end to your sorrow, but the intellect of a tranquil man becomes very steady. So, you see your decision making faculty will become very correct it will correct itself it will become very steady if your mind is in a tranquil state just impulsively jumping into action that is not what is recommended. You get the point that is why tranquility equanimity of mind, collectedness basically the that is the very purpose of every yog. In any yog this today you know you are trained and taught to be in an excitability mode. Aap soch ke dekho that exhausts a lot of your energy. If you want to tap your entire potential, the mind should be calm and you must train it towards that. So, this training about this also the Bhagavad Gita is going to tell you and in in so many ways the what happens if this is not this training does not take place that is also told to you you see this particular verse, Nasti buddhir ayuktasya, Nacha ayuktasya bhavana, Nacha bhavayata shanti, rashantasya kutasukham, which means have you heard this was this is also another very important verse, it is telling you Nasti buddhir ayuktasya, a yukta, a man who is in contact with the reality about himself, he is called a yukta, again and again the yukta is described in the Bhagavad Gita, which means being touch with your reality, keep your mind in your heart and know that you are the self functioning through this body mind complex, if you are in touch with this reality about yourself, what will happen? Your intellect will blossom and nasty buddhir ayukthasya, for an ayuktha, his intellect does not develop, see very important idea that giving you, if you are in a particular state of yoga, your higher intellect will just blossom,acha yuktasya bhavana even your mind will not remain steady your bhavana will not remain steady if you are not a yukta today when I see young people suffering from depression inability to control mind going into drugs I really feel where are you losing. If the mind cannot remain at peace you will not have happiness try what you may I told you last time about synthetic joys and original real joys based on your source so think about it and see and then he also gives the way to control the mind because you see Arjun is putting questions exactly like us he he says chanchalam hi mana krishna pramathi balavadhridam dekhe sabhi hamari avastha bhi yehi hai then देखे हमारी आवस्ता भी यही है। तो वो कहते है, तस्याहम निग्रहम मन्ये वायो रिवसु दुश्करम। इसका मतलब है, मन हमेशा चंचल रहता है, है न? चंचलं ही मन कृष्ण प्रमात ही, बहुत दुश्करम है, और बलवद्रिदं, बहुत दुश्करम है, तस्याहम निग्रहम, मन कृष्ण करने के लिए वायो रिवसु दुश्करम है, यह अच्छा bohot durid hai and tasyaham nigraham controlling the mind appears to me vayurivasu dushkaram which means as difficult as it is to control the wind and then Krishna advises him it is true asamshayam mahabaho manodurnigraham chalam abhyasenatu kaunteya vairagyena chagrihate it is no doubt true it is very difficult to control the mind but it can be done through abhyaas and through vairagya. Abhyaas ka matlab hai, you practice again and again. The mind running away, you bring it back. Mind wandering away, you bring it back. You remember the brain is neuroplastic, isn't it? Neuroplasticity I told you you which means you are not hardwired for ahh restlessness and suffering. As you go on putting the right habits the brain will change its structure, it will change for the better, you change your neural pathways through your habits. So, you can you are at the helm of change, if you will rightly create the right habits in your life you can you are at the helm of change, if you will rightly create the right habits in your life you can change anything. So, he says abhyas first thing, second he says vairagya ka matlab hai, see when we are moving towards a particular goal, if there are unnecessary distractions which you actually do not want to experience, but they impinge into your life, you must show a little anger towards them, you must show a little displeasure towards them, this is called vairagya. I told I told you about incentive salience, you can keep liking something which you do not want, it actually ah sort of ah takes away your energy, these kind of unnecessary struggles in your life. So, if you show a certain amount of displeasure towards that object a certain amount of anger that is justified and if you move in that way you will move straight towards your goal. So, he is saying abhyasena dukaunteya vairagyena chakriyate by these 2 methods you can bring the mind under control. Then you know Arjun puts another very important question which we which is our problem also everyone's problem he says at a gain a priority on pop up charity Purusha her on each and every wash naya Baladhi when you are jitter which means impelled by what does a man commit sin he does not want to do it but as if forcefully he is being put into that up they get your drug addicts or they alcohol addicts all these people if you ask them why you have gone into it they will say I did not want to go something sort of my own mind forced me into it so you can hold a bala hai bala diwa neo jitha hai as if something is forcing you into this you see then the reply which Krishna gives you know all bad habits are like that you do not want to get into it they just come and overpower you so what is the solution to this again in the Bhagavad Gita Krishna is telling Arjun your basic modes of thinking are not right that is why your habits have become wrong so you are doing this you see he says Your culture told you this always shuddery poo hote hai manushy ke jeevan me Kaam, krodh, madh lobh, moham, matsarya this will pull you down unless you resist and remain strong why does the mind behave like this you don't want to do a particular thing it's forcing you to do it because you have given in to these lower impulses so raise yourself by yourself uddhared atmana atmanam na atmanam avasadayet, do not give in to these lower impulses you will see your your mind your whole life will blossom towards the highest, enormous energy will come into your being and your will will function magically it will just get you what you want to achieve. So understand all the enemies are right within us, later on he is going to tell him, tri vidham narakas vedam, dwaram nasanam atmanah, kama krodha tatha lobha tasma deta trem tejet, know these rupus, kama, krodha, lobha to be your enemies here and they will take you into hell. You will really have a hell of an experience if you do not check your lower impulses. So, become aware, yehi teaching diya jaara hai yaha par. You must so train the human faculties that you achieve the highest in life, is not it? That you are able to achieve your higher goals in life. So, that all these things negativities in your life they do not derail you on the way. So, that is why this message is being given to you. And then once you have got into this kind of a general purification the art of concentration is being taught. In the 6th chapter you have such wonderful verses on concentration. Lord Krishna tells advises Arjuna how should you concentrate you see these two verses they are useful to you. Shanaya Shanayru Paramed Budhya Dhriti Grihithaya Atma Samstham Mana Kritva Nakinchidapi Chintayet You see the mind is wandering away constantly this happens in studies is not it what should I do slowly gradually step by step you must bring back the wandering mind set your intelligence in patience and steady your mind in the self constantly bring back the mind you see I told you every time it goes, if you keep bringing it back at one point it will not go, so often it will not go at all, it is a matter of habit, so bring back Atma Samstha Manakritva is an important clue, this is actually yoga, if you keep the mind in the heart which is a yogic technique, the mind will not wander अगर आप योगीक टेकनिक के लिए पाद पर परणाद करते हैं, पाद पर परणाद करते हैं। आपको ज़्यादाग जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना जाना collected and a different dimension of intelligence opens within you. Aap karke dekho thoda sa concentration, thoda sa meditation, paanch minute ke liye aap karke dekho. Just now I will give you a technique and you will see indeed you can be in charge of your energies and your mind will remain subdued under your control, full of awareness, fully alive yet under control. You see what a beautiful state that must be. The thoughts you want come in the emotions you want to feel you are able to experience you are not carried away you are not under your negativities. So, you do not have to go into all these synthetic joys to keep you happy and delighted. So, putting you in charge of yourself this is what Bhagavad Gita is telling you, this is actually the essence of the Bhagavad Gita, elevating human life by oneself, by one's own faculties, training you to do it. Here let us practice that 5 minute meditation, are you ready? Thoda practical mein jayein, I will teach you a 5 minute guided meditation which you can do every day just to collect your energies and learn to concentrate. Okay, it will take just 5 minutes. Sit straight all of you. See, when you sit in your room, you can sit in that lotus posture which he is sitting, folding your knees. But here because the chairs are like that I do not mind if you put your leg down ok, but jab room practice karoge sit in that position. What happens you know when you sit in that position posture is very important in meditation. If you sit erect all your organs will come out alive you know they would not if you droop they will also droop a kind of alertness will come into your mind just by posture. So, fix your posture always keep the backbone straight this is the first thing and not just in meditation jab bhi concentrate karte ho when you are just sitting hearing lectures when you are working in your room keep the backbone straight and look at its magical effect on your body and mind. And then see some certain basic things I will tell you before I start, if you just still the body to a great extent you still the mind, learn to still the body, if you regulate breathing mind will be in your hands, try it and see, if you just regulate breath. So, now, we will practice it all of you back straight, neck straight only I will keep my eyes open because I have to watch you, but all of you have to keep your eyes closed. Yes, close your eyes, keep as still as possible and regulate your breath, harmonious breathing, long drawn-out breaths, just regulating breathing and posture will assure the mood of meditation Regulate your breath and just watch your mind. You see how the thoughts have calmed down. Just posture and breathing regulated, calming effect will come on the mind. If you keep watching your thoughts they will stop what's your thoughts see how they come to a standstill now I will introduce the meditation imagine a point of light in your heart, imagine a point of radiant light in your heart, this is the light of your awareness, you are pure awareness ever shining, ever present of the nature of existence, pure consciousness and bliss. All knowledge is within this, all power is here. You are pure awareness always. This is the light of awareness ever shining in your heart. Identify strongly with this point of awareness which you are. This has a name, it is called Om. We will just chant Om five times, a long drawn out Om. Just follow me. Om Om Om Om Om Om Om Om Om Om Om Om Om Om Om Om Om Om For the next one minute you will just hear the Om going on within you Deeply concentrate the Om is perpet OM going on within you. Deeply concentrate. The OM is perpetually going on. Just hear it within your heart. Yn ystod y bwysau, mae'r cyfrifiadau'n cael eu cymryd yn y gweithle. Yn ystod y bwysau, mae'r cyfrifiadau'n cael eu cymryd yn y gweithle. Yn ystod y bwysau, mae'r cyfrifiadau'n cael eu cymryd yn y gweithle. Yn ystod y bwysau, mae'r cyfrifiadau'n cael eu cymryd yn y gweithle. Yn ystod y bwysau, mae'r cyfrifiadau'n cael eu cymryd yn y gweithle. Feel the stillness within you, see how the mind has come to rest. You are just awareness without thoughts. This is your real state now let us again bring in specific thoughts imagine that point of light your awareness expand, expand infinitely all around you and encompass everything, your body, your mind, your thoughts, your will, the objects around you, the world around you, your awareness encompasses everything. You are in a sense one with everything. we call God. Remember, these are your real states of mind. When mind activity is not there, awareness remains over. You can expand that awareness and reach the state of pure consciousness. this mood of stillness you must keep up see after a meditation like this whatever you think will be even more brighter, your thought process will be clearer why you have stopped normal thought at least for 2-3 minutes. You have decreased the volume of information in your brain, isn't it? You haven't stopped thought for 2-3 minutes, we should say you stopped it maybe for a few fractions of a second, but at least you stopped the constant flow of information for some time. just a 5 minute meditation, it has a calming effect on body and mind. So, this you can practice, when you learn the art of concentration, why do we tell you fix the mind in the heart, you know yogically speaking if I can use that word, you are raising vital energy to the heart by doing that, because you have fixed your attention on the heart this is an important technique by doing that the mind will become very clear this kind of confusion restlessness unnecessary distraction all this will not remain Toda try karke dekho you know the art of concentration will just descend on you. So do not simply struggle with unnecessary things, do not waste your youth on that, struggling with anger, struggling with distractions, no. There is a glorious life in front of you, train this system properly and you can get the best out of life. So then now we will proceed to some of the methods of good living. See today when when you will be in leadership roles, you know values are discussed everywhere nowadays okay. roles, you know values are discussed everywhere nowadays, ok. What is the origin of values in workplaces, in corporates also today, values are discussed, is not it? Value begins as virtue within you. So, today we are here, we are going to discuss some of these basic virtues which are called divine attributes in the Bhagavad Gita, Daivi Sampad. Why they are being called divine attributes is, if you just develop them, absorb them into your character, you will actually exude a kind of a very commanding presence, you will actually exude a very sattvic nature which will get you success everywhere. So, these are some of the virtues which the Bhagavad Gita asks us to develop. If you develop virtues today, tomorrow in the workplace as leaders you will command the values you want to command. If these virtues do not become part of us you know that that integrity, honesty, transparency which is required of a leader will not come out. Today there is this tendency to ignore personal virtues and only focus on gimmicks at the workplace, values at the workplace that alone will not work. The the your personal life should be of this type so you see the virtues which are being told here they are at the very heart of great character it is a great character means these virtues will be present. You see first he says Abhayam Sattva Samshuddhi Jnana Yoga Vyavasthitihe Dhanam Damascha Yajnascha This is in the 16th chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, the first three verses, the eva sampad he is describing. What is the first virtue he is saying, abhayam, a sense of fearlessness, which means what, I am not doing something under compulsion. Ability to give this abhay to others, it does not mean just being non-violent, it means a non-injurious nature, not giving injury in any form to anybody, that is giving abhay, a sense of abhayam, sattva samshuddhi, purity of heart, which means you mean what you say, you do what you think is right, not that thinking is one way, emotion is another way and willing is some other direction, not like that. Basic purity of heart, sattva samshuddhi, jnana yoga vyavasthitihi, an attachment towards this knowledge and yoga, higher knowledge and yoga, that is jnana yoga vyavasthiti hi an attachment towards this knowledge and yog higher knowledge and yog that is jnana yoga vyavasthiti hi. Aisa mat samjho all this is outdated knowledge abhi hum kaise use kare in all you know management studies they are bringing in this philosophy everywhere in the world. In fact, I find greater enthusiasm for Yoga Vedanta outside India. You know why? They have understood the value of all these systems of thought. So, you should make it part of your life. You should make it part of your thinking. Isi liye keh rahe hain. Jnana Yoga Vyavasthiti hi. A mind which is sensitive to Jnana, this level of knowledge and Yog. Hmm, asamaj samajna that this this is not going to matter, this is going to matter most in your life. Because if you have not trained this, the objective world cannot offer you anything. Then dhanam, the tendency to give, be a contributor I always told you, is not it? In any situation the contribution you must be the contributor. You know people who have amassed a lot of wealth, ok. Let me tell you a very wonderful incident here. People who have amassed a lot of wealth, after some time they only want to give out that wealth to others. how much can you stack and store and hoard, after all what what will you do with it, you know philanthropist like for example, Bill Gates today, do you know the amount of contribution he has made, I have some figures here. His total wealth in 2013 for a long time he has been the richest man in the world, I hope you know that. His total wealth in 2013 was US dollar 78.5 billion out of which 35 billion he has given out in charitable works. It is the greatest capital given out for charity so far, enormous and he is doing charitable work all over the world with an inner inspiration through his bill and Melinda Gates foundation. And he he kept only about dollar 10 million not billion, 10 million for his children, each one gets 10 million and the rest he is giving out in charity, enormous projects he has initiated in so many developing countries, underdeveloped countries and doing great work. Now you see this inspiration, how does it come from, where does it come? So here let me tell you also the story of John D. Rockefeller, have you heard? Rockefeller Foundation apne nahi suna hai? Even National Geographic Society is connected to Rockefeller, have you heard? Rockefeller Foundation, apne nahi sunayat? Even National Geographic Society is connected to Rockefeller Foundation. See let me tell you this story, when Vivekananda was in United States, he went there in 1893 for the Parliament and then 1894 also he was there. That time this Rockefeller was a very rich businessman. He had given his entire life for building business and making money and that time he was of course, not yet the the richest man may be, but he he had a huge fortune and a very well established man of that society, but he had no peace of mind. He was a very willful personality who was very difficult to advise and could not get well get along well with his colleagues and all that, but whatever it is he had no peace of mind with all this wealth. So, one day his friends told him why do not you visit that yogi Hindu yogi Vivekananda who has who is here and he said no no no I would not go to all these people, but some impulse came after a sometime and he went to meet Vivekananda. When he entered the place where Vivekananda was staying, you know he was not in his living room. So, he entered the study, he actually bypassed the butler, just show him aside in a way and entered. And he he went into the study and Vivekananda was sitting there absorbed in a book, he had enormous power of concentration you see. So, if you would take a book he would just be soaked up in that. So, he did not notice Rockefeller's coming and Rockefeller is such an important big man in America, such a huge businessman. Actually he was the owner of Standard Oil company that made him make such a huge fortune and so he came there and he saw Vivekananda and Vivekananda is sitting absorbed so he knocked on his table and then Vivekananda looked up and he said the first thing he said was you know some things about Rockefeller's life which only Rockefeller knew he said oh this is these are the things which I see and Rockefeller said who told this to you then Vivekananda said nobody needs to tell this to me my mind is able to see through other minds as one sees through a glass case then Vivekananda said but your mind is restless you are suffering from peacelessness isn't it Rockefeller said yes I have no peace of mind I have everything in the world then Vivekananda said I will tell you the secret for peace don't think you have enormous wealth and that you are the owner of that wealth you are the custodian of your wealth you are not the owner of your wealth so use that wealth wherever it is needed to whoever it is needed to the poor to the needy to the afflicted give out your wealth to them bring support and help to other people, bring joy into other hearts and I will tell you peace will just unfold from within your heart. Rockefeller was not used to getting advice. So anyway he heard this and then he left abruptly. After a few days again he came he came and again he entered the living room Vivekananda is not there he went into the study again Vivekananda was sitting there absorbed in a book again he knocked and Vivekananda looked up and then he put a paper on the table and he said look at this that was a huge donation he had made to a public cause. Then Vivekananda saw the paper and Rockefeller said you can thank me for it and Vivekananda looked up and said it is for you to thank me. I have brought back your peace of mind. Later in a few years after this in 20, sorry, 1913 I think, Rockefeller Foundation he created, which did enormous work. In fact, he was the Bill Gates of his time, of that era, 100, more than 100 years back. And he gave out 550 million in charity. The last 4 years of Rockefeller's life was entirely he went out of business, he stepped out of business actually, gave it to his son and then he devoted himself entirely to philanthropic work. He caught the cue, the inspiration from these words and he converted his life like that and so he got rid of that restlessness which he was suffering from. So, you see in every life somewhere sometime we will understand happiness is a state of mind, if my mind is not functioning properly no matter what is there in my life I will not be happy. So, I must know how to take charge of this first and you know the connection between John D Rockefeller and Bill Gates. Bill Gates took his inspiration for philanthropy from David Rockefeller who was the youngest son of John D Rockefeller. So, you see the Vivekananda effect continues. So, what I am telling you is these are all ways to attain inner stability, peace of mind that is why dhanam is a divine attribute, you must be a giver. In fact, see in your own system who is generating the wealth which you are going to create and you will instantly know your today you have in management studies trusteeship management nobody is an owner you can at the most be a trustee of any great body of wealth. So why that wealth is meant to be used for social causes and you are the trustee of that wealth. So this idea was introduced by Vivekananda in a way you can say when he said you are not the owner of your wealth you are the custodian of your wealth use it for good purposes your peace will come back to you. So, you see you can that is why I said basic virtue should be there then there will be values in the workplace values arise the social context, virtues virtue arises in the personal context whether anybody is seeing or not whether anybody knows it or not I am what I am I I am basically a man of virtue this should come into our lives. Dhanam dhamascha dhamma is again control of the senses of the mind, yajna is again acknowledging the fact of the exchange the importance of exchange in life, you are taking from life you must be able to give back to it, replenishing life is the principle of yajna. Swadhyaya, good amount of self study every day or in everyday basis, now because you पाध्याय गुड़ अमौंट अप्सेल्फ स्टडी एव्री दे और एव्री दे बेसिस नाओ बिकोस यो सो बिजी मेबी 5-10 मिनित सा डे थोड़ा सा गीता पढ़ना है नाओ जस्त इन दे खुलीडेज और एगलर बेसिस और तप तप पड़ना है जो एक एक अपना अस्ट जो तपस्या करता है, तप का मतलब है जो तपस्या करता है, तप का मतलब है जो तपस्या करता है, तप का मतलब है जो तपस्या करता है, तप का मतलब है जो तपस्या करता है, तप का मतलब है जो तपस्या करता है, तप का मतलब है जो तपस्या करता है, तप का मतलब है जो तपस्या करता है, तप का मतलब है जो तपस्या करता है, तप का मतलब है जो तपस्या करता है, तप का मतलब है जो तपस्या करता है, तप का मतलब है जो तपस्या करता है, तप का मतलब है जो तपस्या करता है, तप का मतलब है जो तपस्या करता है, तप का मत will do, tap ka matlabhi hai, it generates heat, it it actually takes your energies to the next higher level. So a certain amount of austerity, just being extravagant, just being frivolous, this will not get you anywhere. Purposeful, you are already like that, otherwise you would not be here, so develop these virtues further. Arjavam, the actual meaning of Arjavam is uprightness. Uprightness ka matlab hai? Straightforwardness, honesty, integrity, all these qualities make it part of your being. Then Ahimsa, abhai means being fearless, ahimsa means this ability to not injure in any way, Satya being devoted to truth, remember this if Satya is not there you can be no leader, basically your employees will be seeing looking out for the integrity of your personality, is not it. So satya, akrodha, remain in a mature state of mind, if you only are reacting negatively with anger, with hatred towards this one, with bias, with prejudice, you cannot do anything at the workplace, is not it. anger, with hatred towards this one, with bias, with prejudice, you cannot do anything at the workplace, is not it? In fact, organizational failure is due to this many times. You do not know how to behave basic, basically. That is why there is a corporate culture now, you know, you must know how to talk and how to behave, basically with other people. You cannot show anger, you cannot show resistance to others opinions. So, Akrodha, Tyaga, ability to give up what is what does not matter too much, not sticking and continuing in the same old silly grooves, Shanti, a basic placid state of mind and you see if you are always in a restless mode you are wasting energy, this is what they are trying to tell you, a paishunam absence of animosity, jealousy all this is animosity, absence of that, absence of even calumny, which is a tendency to talk ill of others. You see some people have that they will ignore all the good in others and pick up some minor fault or something and keep exaggerating on that. So, such people go into that state only, get rid of all these dirty tendencies, small tendencies these are. Then, Daya, a compassionate outlook, see I am telling you know for a Karma Yogi this is very important, he is very sensitive to pain and suffering in others, that is why he cannot help being a Karma Yogi, it is a great quality Daya. Bhuteshu, Daya Bhuteshu, for all beings, Daya. And then Aloluptvam, Aloluptvam is usually given as uncovetiousness, through control of the senses you come to this, a kind of basic contentment. Ardravam, gentleness in behavior, Hira Hri, Hri is actually modesty in behavior, modesty is not there no respect will come, respect is not meant to be demanded, it is meant to be commanded and it comes only through modesty. Achapalam, achapalam is absence of fickleness, if you are fickle constantly changing direction as I told you, can you can you be relied upon, you cannot be relied upon. Then Teja, Teja is great energy, you are radiant with energy as it were, strength and energy, kshama, ability to forgive, if you keep holding the small things, wrong things about others in your head, you will collapse, nothing else will happen, so let go. Dhriti, dhriti is fortitude, a powerful well-developed will, shou-cham, shou-cham is again purity in every sense, adro-ho, adro-ho na-ti-ma-ni-ta, no droha towards anyone, hmm and you see the Hindi may be shabda hai isli aapko samajh mein aayenge, na-ti-ma-ni-ta which means absence of pride not that you are always wanting praise always seeking somebody's adulation absence of pride basically in an impersonal way you are able to work bhavanti all these bhavanti sampadam daivim abhijatasya bharata these are the daivi, the great attributes of the divine attributes of human nature which you will see in an abhijata person, a person who is of really that caliber will have these qualities of that kind of a glorious noble birth will have these qualities daivisampad. I told you if you develop virtue, it will translate into values in your workplace. If you are able to generate value systems in your workplace, there is no question whether you should be a leader or not, you will become a natural leader. It is the absence of this that is the cause for all our corruption, all our societal problems. We have ignored this part. You see how clear it is being said in the Bhagavad Gita, what you should cultivate, what you should develop? Madam. Yes. These things are telling about the shama, then. Shama, haan. Then what to be punished? Okay, that is contextual question actually, you must punish according to the level of the crime, is not it. Here when they are talking of kshama, they are talking about a natural disposition of mind which is forgiving. You see people can hold grudges for small reasons, do not develop this kind of a silly outlook that is what they are telling you here, you understand, holding grudges for small things, going into negative modes of mind due to that, do not go get into all this, this is what they are meaning to tell you here. So these are all the methods of sattvic living for a successful life, a successful life is a meaningful life, hai na, agar meaning na ho life mein success ho sakta hai, think and tell me. Successful life means meaningful life, all this brings meaning into your life, that is why it is important. So then, many other things are discussed discussed I am not going to go into all of them, but this much I will tell you. So, many things are given in the Gita which will which are going to point out towards your success they are going to tell you what what is the nature of the sattvic doer with what sense of agentship should you function. Since we are discussing karma yoga yoga all this is important to you. Then what what constitutes the actual austerity of your speech, your mind, your life energies? These are all very important Anudvega Karam Vakyam very beautiful verses are there. I leave it for your homework practical session anyway . So, I will give you at the end of the class, you will just know what is expected of a well developed human being, um who what kind of quality will drive you towards leadership. So, this is there and of course, sensitivity to these things, you see when when we are when the Gita is talking about leadership, um this is a model of leadership which I have put there just look at that slide. You see there are types of leaders, there is a democratic leader, there is a facilitative leader, there is a dictatorial leader, there are utopian benevolent dictatorial leaders. Each ones characteristics are put there just notice them democratic leader gets input from others, institutes voting delegates occasionally or he may not even delegate and debates about it. Now, our ideal amongst all of these you can look at their characteristics quickly, but I will tell you the ideal is the facilitative leader. See there he serves others, offers guidance, appreciates inquiry and dialogue. He is participatory, he is focused on others, is not it? Compare it with the others, dictatorial leader of course you know, the utopian leader also you know. So once you have noticed that diagram, now you will know how we can apply the virtues we have been discussing for this kind of leadership, you see for you to be able to have this service mindset naturally you are a Karma Yogi, you have a disciplined mind, you have a disciplined will which is turned towards serving others. In order to offer guidance and not just domination you know again you require these basic virtues which we have been discussing. In order to be able to appreciate enquiry and dialogue, again in order to be able to delegate, again you need these certain basic things in your personality in order to be successful as a facilitative leader. So, you see the essentials if you ask me to sum up for leadership what does Bhagavad Gita teach you, I will say it teaches you the means to tranquility because your mind the way it is working is very important for your decision making, very important at the work place for in whatever you do, you see your work will be perfect only if your mind is very steady. So, the means to tranquility is what Gita teaches you. Buddhi yoga, how you can attain to yoga just by refining your intellect, taking it very high, it will lead to the state of yoga. Buddhi yoga is an important concept in the Bhagavad Gita. Here we have no time to go into it in detail, but you can attain to yoke just through refining your intellect. And mind control, basics of mind control which we discussed, art of concentration, all this is important as a leader, how to face trials and obstacles, how not to go into negativities and depression, this also we discussed, what is it that is making us go into negativities, so how to stop that. Then the charisma of divine attributes, a leader should be able to radiate that charisma, it comes only by developing virtue at the personal level that will translate into values at the workplace. Then the nature of gunas, why this is put in under leadership is, you know, there are there are 3 gunas working, aapko to abhi abhi tak pata hua hoga, satva, rajas and tamas. Can a tamasic person be a leader tell me? Jiske upar sirf tamas hai, full of anger, hatred, egoism, you may perform very well up your particular task because you have been trained in it, but you cannot remain a leader for long. That is why the nature of the basic gunas you are composed of plays a part in leadership that is why I give you sattvic ways of living. This is essential. If a leader is tamasic, after sometime either the organization falls or he will no more be the leader. This is the simple result. And then it will redefine happiness for you. In Bhagavad Gita it is very beautifully put, you will attain higher and higher forms of happiness as you go on refining your system. Yam labdhvacha paramlabham manyate nadhikam tathah, yes means, thithona dukhena gurunapi vichalate Bhagavad Gita says, which means this is a kind of happiness, higher happiness is something you get which totally gives you total total contentment you do not want anything more than that. Yam labdhvacha aparam labham manyate nadhikam tathah tas means yes means it does not any kind of sorrow does not shake you anymore. You can attain these higher levels of happiness if you develop these modes of living, sattvic modes of living and of course, it will show in your workplace. So, this in a sense is essence of Bhagavad Gita for you as students what you can draw from the Bhagavad Gita. with one thing see today's corporates believe in spiritual leadership it is it is not a concept which is utopian unless we have developed unless we have developed a mature mindset and we have developed certain faculties a socially oriented will for example, we will not be accepted in the workplace in leadership positions. For all of you it is important to understand this basically, you cannot remain have leadership just by hook or by crook, it comes only when you are able to command that level of respect. Isire spiritual leadership is a kind of leadership which transforms you, it is due to your inner transformation, it is not due to whether the majority voted you for you or not. You get the point it is not others opinions based on you, it it is just the entire flowering of your personality that brings you to a point of what we are calling spiritual leadership . This will become part and parcel of your your own life and this will be able to what happens is you develop a kind of equanimity under all circumstances of life and this has actually been described as the goal of human life is any kind of situation you are in you know how to face it, you are always in a positive state, you have a kind of serenity which does not change with the situations around you. So for this let me just tell you one story and I will end today's class and of course we will be concluding this course. See this story is the story of Shukadev, Shuka who was a knower of Brahman, a great man of realization, he was actually the son of Vyas, Ved Vyas. Aapne suna hai Vyas ka naam, he was the compiler of the Puranas and all this. So just see this Shuka's state of mind, this is what I want you to observe. It seems he was born with the knowledge of the highest, the ultimate. And so his father knew it immediately that he does not have much to teach this child because he is born with the knowledge of ultimate reality. So he sends him to Janaka, Janaka of Mithila, he was another great Brahma Rishi of Vedic times. So he sends his son to Janaka. Janaka hears that this is a remarkable boy who has had the highest knowledge and that is why he is a well-known Rishi of his time. So but he deliberately arranges things in such a way just to test this boy. So when Shukdev arrives in Mithila, there is nobody at the gate to welcome him. Although he is the son of Vyas, who is well known, renowned all over the Bharatvarsh and he himself is a knower of Brahman, still there is Janaka has not come to receive him and he is actually ignored. At the gates, he is just given a seat to sit there but you know there is absolutely no change in Shukaís face. The guards notice that this is a man, nothing can shake him, he is neither angry nor is he hateful nor is he wanting to go back, no resentments nothing, he is blissfully sitting there. He was not even offered the bare hospitality required to be offered to a guest. Then after some time he is ushered into the palace and there for almost a week he is given extra hospitality, all kinds of good stuff and good clothes to wear and fragrant bath and good food and kept in all luxury again they notice there is no change on Shuka's radiant face. Mind is so stable, unmoving sort of and blissful, nobody can shake him out of that state. Then finally he is ushered into Janaka's presence in the courtroom where he used to hold court, he is brought there and Janaka sees this young boy who is so radiant with the light of supreme knowledge and he tells him, my son, here is a bowl of milk, he gives him a bowl full to the brim with milk, full to the brim, almost that if he shakes it too much it it will fall, the milk will fall. But Janaka says now you take this bowl of milk all around the hall 7 times, I just want to see how you do it. And in that hall there were musicians, there were there were dance performances going on because you know it is a it is a king's court and all the attraction of those beautiful faces everything is going on. And Shuka takes that bowl of milk goes all over the hall round the hall 7 times not a single drop of milk falls the hand is so steady because the mind is so steady the mind is so steady because he has attained the state of supreme tranquility and the look on his face the bliss on his face seeing him the whole courtiers and everybody in the court are simply stunned so this is a possibility the state of Shuka as soon as he brings back the bow to Janaka, Janaka tells him I have nothing more to teach you, your mind is not distracted by anything in this world, it is in perfect poise all the time, you will allow only what you want to come in, only that you will allow to come in it does not it it is unmoving unchanging in a state of supreme tranquility yet exuding the highest consciousness the highest bliss. So, I have nothing more to teach you you have attained the highest this is the ideal in our heritage spiritual heritage this is a possibility with this human mind if it is trained through all these disciplines which we have been discussing it can teach you reach the highest goal of human life which is you are doing work great work but the mind is in a completely yogic state in in direct touch with reality this is the ideal karma yogi given in our scriptures. So, with this let me conclude our session as well as this course let us make it an offering at the feet of the lord himself with a small small prayer. 谢谢观看 下集再见
 Om Asato Maa Sadgamaya Tamaso Maa Jyotirgamaya Om Shanti Shanti Shanti Om, lead us from the unreal to the real, lead us from darkness unto light, lead us from death to immortality. Om, peace, peace, peace. Good morning everybody. My pranams to Revered Maharaj and gratitude to him for organizing this and the other program in the afternoon and inviting me here. It's great to be back. Question what is Vedanta? When Maharaj said this subject, I've been speaking about Vedanta ever since I've become a monk, but actually I've never spoken on this subject. What is Vedanta? So Maharaj has given me this opportunity and I was asking myself yes, what is Vedanta? And I kept asking the question and the answers that I got I shall share them here with you today. that I got, I shall share them here with you today. We shall ask the question again and again, what is Vedanta and see what answers do come. Swami Vivekananda, he spoke about this at the Harvard University. He was asked to speak at the Harvard University. And the subject was the Vedanta. And he started off with, what is Vedanta? I'll start off with what he said. He said Vedanta is basically the philosophy of all of Hinduism. His exact words were Vedanta comprises all the various sects of Hinduism. That's the first sentence he said. And it is true. The core philosophy of Hinduism today is Vedanta. In fact, though it does not appear to be so, but if you interrogate, if you approach a Hindu organization, a Hindu sect, and you look behind the rituals and the temples and the deities, you will find a branch of Vedanta there. The Hare Krishnas, the ISKCON, are very well known across the Western world. But not many know that it is actually a branch of Vedanta. The core philosophy of the Gaudiya Vaishnavas, from whom the ISKCON has come, is Achintya Veda Veda, a particular philosophy, a school of Vedanta. There are some grand temples coming up across the world today, another sect of Hinduism, the Swaminarayan sect. In USA also, you have a number of these temples. And yet not many people know that that is also a school of Vedanta. In fact, the Swaminarayan sect was originally a branch of Vishishtadvaita, Ramanuja's school of Vedanta. Now, of course, they have developed their own unique school of Vedanta, but still a school of Vedanta. And look at us, the Vedanta societies. We are also a particular school of Vedanta. At our core is the Advaita Vedanta, of course, in the way it is studied in the light of Sri Ramakrishna's life and teachings. So Vedanta is at the heart of Hinduism. In fact, the various schools of orthodox Hindu philosophy, Nyaya, Vaisheshika, Sankhya, Yoga, Purvam Imamsa and Vedanta. If you look at a textbook on Indian philosophy, you will find several chapters and one of which will be Vedanta. But that does not give an accurate picture of what's there on the ground. Because if you actually go to India or if you actually ask Hindus, what is the background of your particular tradition of Hinduism, you will find some school of Vedanta or the other. The other schools of Hindu philosophy are at present more academic than practical. In fact, if you ask a scholar of the Nyaya school, I know a great philosopher, he is a scholar of the Nyaya, the Indian school of logic. But if you ask, are you in practice a Nyayaka? He will say, no, no, no, I'm a Vaishnava. So he follows a particular school of Vedanta. On the ground in India, actually in practice, you will find various schools of Vedanta. So that's the first answer that we get. When you look at Hinduism. Vedanta is the core philosophy of Hinduism in its various schools, flavors, if you will. If you ask once again, what is Vedanta, the word itself, Veda, Anta. Veda are the core texts, the fundamental texts of Hinduism are the Vedas. And anta literally means the end. So the end of the Vedas, end in the sense, the last teachings of the Vedas, the final teachings of the Vedas, the highest teachings of the Vedas, that is Vedanta. Anta, technically, a Sanskrit scholar said, is not literally the end here. It means siddhanta, the final conclusions of the Vedas. So that is Vedanta. Vedanta is the final, the highest teachings of the Vedas. The highest teachings of Hinduism that you will get is Vedanta. In fact, the Nyaya scholar whom I mentioned, Professor Arindam Chakravarti, he is now at Stony Brook near New York. He gave a talk recently at the Vedanta Society of New York. And he gave a new meaning. I'd never considered this. He gave a new meaning to the word Vedanta. Anta, he says, is edge. And that's true. Anta is the edge, the edge of a razor, for example. And so Vedanta is the cutting edge of knowledge. Not an ancient philosophy, but the cutting edge of knowledge. Veda literally means knowledge. Vid means to know. And so Vedanta can be a new translation. I hadn't considered this. So Vedanta, and it's appropriate. It's the cutting edge of knowledge. Let's ask once again, what is Vedanta? What knowledge? Not all knowledge, what knowledge? There is a text which has been used for the past 600 years or so to introduce novices to Vedanta, the study of classical Advaita Vedanta. It's called Vedanta Sara. Riviat Maharaj was telling me how when he was a novice, he studied the Vedanta Sara in our training center in our main monastery in India. And I studied it too. One of our teachers, and you won't believe this, when Maharaj was saying 1894, and I said I'm not that ancient but there are but there are teachers who are really ancient. One of the teachers from whom I learned a lot was also Maharaj's teacher and that teacher is still alive. He's about 105 or 6 years old now. So Vedanta Sara, he has translated that book and there the first lesson we learned about Vedanta, what is the definition of Vedanta, we were required to memorize it and the definition is this, Vedanta Nama Upanishad Pramanam. It is in the Vedanta Sara, that textbook. What is Vedanta? It is the source of spiritual knowledge called the Upanishads. So Vedanta is basically the most accurate technical definition of Vedanta would be the texts called the Upanishads. The knowledge you get from the texts called the Upanishads is Vedanta. In a secondary sense, the texts themselves are called Vedanta. So in a primary sense, the spiritual knowledge that we get from the Upanishads is Vedanta. In a secondary sense, the texts themselves, Vedanta. So in a primary sense, the spiritual knowledge that we get from the Upanishads is Vedanta. In a secondary sense, the text themselves, Vedanta, Upanishad Pramanam. Not just the Upanishads, but more popularly all over the world, if there is one text that is associated with Hinduism, it is the Bhagavad Gita. And Sri Krishna teaches Arjuna there. And many people do not know what he teaches there is the Upanishads. If you have studied the Upanishads, sometimes you will find almost the exact verse, almost word for word, Krishna repeats to Arjuna. So no question of plagiarism in those days. And that was expected. That was expected, that a master would base his or her teachings on the Upanishads. So the Bhagavad Gita is basically the essence of the teachings of the Upanishads. And it is considered a part of the canonical texts of the Vedanta, so Bhagavad Gita. And there is one more text, not a popular text, in fact, quite the contrary, called the Brahma Sutras, composed by Vyasa. These are aphorisms, very cryptic, short Sanskrit texts which deal with the various philosophical questions arising from the Upanishads. The Upanishads are poetic, are mystical. And the questions which arise, when you read all the Upanishads together, you'll have many questions. Those questions are dealt with in a logical, rational fashion in the Brahma Sutras. So these three, the Upanishads, the Bhagavad Gita, the Brahmasutras are together called the triple canon or the triple foundation of Vedanta. Prasthanatraya. The Upanishads are called Shruti Prasthana because they come from the Vedas. The Gita is called Smriti Prasthana because it comes from the Mahabharata. And the Brahmasutra is called Nyi Prasthana because it comes from the Mahabharata and the Brahma Sutra is called Nyaya Prasthana in the sense of the logical foundation of Vedanta. And these Brahma Sutras were the foundation for the various schools of Vedanta, great spiritual masters, philosophers and spiritual masters who came Shankara and others after him. They wrote commentaries explaining the Brahma Sutras which are very cryptic, very difficult, obscure to understand. And they wrote these Sanskrit commentaries and these commentaries became the foundation of the schools of Vedanta. Shankara's commentary on the Brahma Sutra is the foundation of Advaita Vedanta, non-dual Vedanta. Ramanuja's commentary on the Brahma Sutra is the foundation of Advaita Vedanta, non-dual Vedanta. Ramanuja's commentary on the Brahma Sutras, the Sri Bhashyam, is the foundation of qualified monism, Vishistha Advaita Vedanta. Madhava's commentary on the Brahma Sutras is the foundation of dualistic Vedanta, Dvaita Vedanta. Nimbarka's commentary is the foundation of Dwaita Dwaita Vedanta. Vallabha's commentary is the foundation of Shuddha Dwaita Vedanta. And so on. So the different schools of Vedanta are based on commentaries on the Brahma Sutra. So that's another answer we get when you ask this question, what is Vedanta? Vedanta, the Upanishads and the Brahma Sutras and the Bhagavad Gita and the commentarial tradition. So that's the textual foundation of Vedanta. But let's ask once more, what is Vedanta? So this is just the surface. But we would like to know, we would like to go into the heart of Vedanta. You see the different schools of Vedanta, among them the, what Swami Tapasyanandaji calls the Bhakti schools of Vedanta, Vishishtadvaita, Dvaita, Shuddhadvaita. These are not so difficult to understand in principle. Each is a glorious tradition with detailed scripts and wonderful traditions of worship, spiritual practice. But in principle, they are not difficult to grasp. Because they are all devotional schools. So, God exists. And we have faith in God, we surrender to God, we love and worship God, lead moral, ethical lives and lives of devotion to the Lord. And by the Lord's grace, we are rescued from samsara, from suffering, from death. Now, this is a kind of religion which we are familiar with, with people all over the world. And it's not so different in spirit from, say, Christianity, or Islam, or Judaism. Theistic religion. Not so difficult to understand. But I shall concentrate today on the one school of Vedanta which is closest to us, which is Advaita Vedanta, non-dual Vedanta. And it is, in fact, very profound and very different from all of these. And it's worth exploring. What is Vedanta? By this, now I mean,'s worth exploring what is Vedanta. By this, now I mean what is Advaita Vedanta. I think that's a very interesting question. Now when we ask what is Vedanta, what is Advaita Vedanta, one way of understanding what is Vedanta is by understanding what Vedanta is not. If I ask the question, what is not Vedanta? Now I'm going to drill down a kind of same Vedantic process of neti neti, which Vedanta applies. I'm going to apply that on Vedanta itself and see what is essential to Advaita Vedanta. What is the core idea of Advaita Vedanta which distinguishes it from everything else? If you want to know the heart of Advaita Vedanta which distinguishes it from everything else? If you want to know the heart of Advaita Vedanta. Now I'm going to say a lot of things right now which might be a little shocking and disturbing. I will say Vedanta is not this, not that, neti neti, but don't worry. Whatever I'm going to say now I'm going to take it all back later on. But first we must drill down deeper. What is Vedanta? The spiritual journey of Vedanta. So, but first we must drill down deeper. What is Vedanta? The spiritual journey of Vedanta, it's not a journey in space. It's not a journey from one place to another. Sometimes when driving along, I see these big billboards, you know, churches put them up. Heaven is a place. Meaning thereby, this is not heaven. That is heaven. So it's another place. Vedanta doesn't talk about the Brahman of Vedanta. It's not that it's not here and it's there. No, it's not a journey from here to there. That's not Vedanta. Sometimes I see a billboard. After death, you will see God, rather ominous. Get your act together right now. After death, you will see God. Now notice the word, the language, after. It's a time word, time word, future. So not now, you will not see God now, but after, after something you will see God. After death, you will see God. A kind of post-mortem spirituality. Now, that's all very good, but that's not Vedanta. That's not Vedanta. It's not then. It's not there. it's not then, it's here and now. What Vedanta speaks about is not cut up by space. In Sanskrit they say, it is not here but it is there. Heaven is not here. This is earth and that is heaven. That's cut up in space. But Vedanta speaks about a reality which is both here and there. In fact, space itself is included in the conception of the absolute. It's both now and then. When you say, after death, you will see God. Or after the savior comes, you will go to heaven. Look at the word after. Even in yoga, you see after samadhi you will see God. After. Vedanta doesn't say that. So it's not a journey in time. You're not waiting for something to happen, death or a mystic experience or the coming of the saviour, coming of the millennium. Not after. or the coming of the saviour, or the coming of the millennium, not after. It's right here, right now. It's not even a journey from one object to another. I am something and God is something else. Let me attain to that. You know, people have this idea. Vedanta is talking about there is some Brahma, some absolute, some infinite being and I shall merge into it. Not even that. It's talking about you, your own reality. The Atman means the self itself. Who am I? What am I? Right here, right now. Not a journey in space, not a journey in time, not a journey from one reality to another, from one object to another, but right here, right now, who or what we are right now. That's what Vedanta talks about. So it's a journey, then what kind of spiritual journey is it? If it's not a journey in space, or time, or object? I'm trying to translate into English as best as I can. In Sanskrit, it's a very powerful philosophical language. So it's just whatever I've said is one phrase. Desha, kaala, vastu, pariched, shunya. Divide or are beyond the limits of time, space, and object. So if that is so, then what kind of a journey is the spiritual journey? How does Vedanta understand the spiritual journey? If it's not in space, it's not in time, not from one thing to another. Vedanta understands the spiritual journey as a journey from ignorance to knowledge. From not knowing, not realizing, to knowing and realizing what I am, what this universe is, what is the point of all of this, to suddenly realizing it. So realization, knowledge, that is the spiritual journey in Vedanta. And this knowledge, let's ask once again, what is Vedanta? If you mean knowledge, what kind of knowledge? What is Vedanta? In the same vein, let me continue. This Vedantic knowledge, what is it not? What is it not? I am still saying what is it not? What is it not? I'm still saying what is it not? Is it being a good person? Again, it might make people uneasy, but don't worry, I'll make up all this later on. Is it being a good person? If I am a very righteous person, I tell the truth, I take care of others, is this Vedanta? No, that is care of others. Is this Vedanta? No, that is called dharma. In Indian traditions, they're very well-demarcated areas. Dharma, what is to be done and what is not to be done. The area of morality and ethics. That is not the core of Vedanta. That leads to, do I have a good, if a person is a dharmic person, good karma, good karma leads to a good life, a happy life, fulfilling life. If I am naughty, adharmic, then bad karma, and bad karma leads to unpleasant things happening in this life and the next. But that is not Vedanta. Is it devotion? Is it devotion? I love God, I worship God, I have faith in God. Is that what Vedanta, Advaita Vedanta, is that what Vedanta is about? No, that is bhakti. That is devotion. Bhakti, the way of love, devotion. Oh, wonderful, but not Vedanta, not Advaita Vedanta. Is it karma, action? Shankaracharya in his commentary on the Isopanishad, he starts the commentary by saying, the first sentence of the Isopanishad, Ishaa vasya mithya deo mantra na karma so viniyuktaaha. These texts which I'm going to explain now, this Upanishad has no connection to karma, to ritual. Why not? And then he'm going to explain now, this Upanishad, has no connection to karma, to ritual. Why not? And then he goes on to explain what can you do by karma, what can you do by action. He says, you can attain something, you can attain St. Louis, comply from New York to St. Louis, you have attained, you have come to something. You can do that by action, You can take action and get something. Produce something. You can produce rice in a field. Utpadya. Second thing is utpadya. The third thing he says is samskarya. You can improve something, or you can repair. You can give a whitewash to a house. You can also do that by action. Vikarya, you can transform one thing to another. A seed can be transformed into a plant. So action can do these four things. Attain something, produce something, refine something or change something. And you, the self, that Atman which Vedanta talks about, you can't attain it, you are already you. What will you attain? You can't produce it, it's always there. Who will produce it? You are already there, eternally so. You can neither refine it nor change it into something else. Action has no role to play in the core of Vedanta. Shankaracharya dismisses it. Not karma, not bhakti. Is it meditation? Is it dhyana meditation? You sit quietly, shut out the world, this is how you sit, this is how you breathe, this is how you calm the mind down, no modifications of the mind, absolutely calm, concentrated mind like a flame in a windless place. Yoga shchitta vritti nirodhaha. Yoga is the cessation of the modifications of the mind. Vedanta? No. That is Patanjali yoga. That's not Vedanta. You may say, Swami, didn't Totapuri teach great sorts of confusion? Totapuri did teach Nirvikalpa Samadhi to Sri Ramakrishna. And you think, oh, Nirvikalpa Samadhi and Advaita Vedanta are the same thing. No, no, no. In all the commentaries, Shankara, in the Upanishad commentaries, Gita commentary, Brahma Sutra commentary, never once does he speak or recommend Nirvikalpa Samadhi. Why this has come about is because the techniques of meditation are very, very useful. Whatever your path, if you are devotional, if you are in the path of knowledge, Vedanta, techniques of meditation, Patanjali meditation techniques are very useful and they have always been adopted by spiritual seekers. So that's why Todapuri also taught meditation techniques to Sri Ramakrishna. But the essence of Vedanta is not meditation. It's not sitting in Samadhi, not shutting yourself out, cutting out the world in Samadhi. No. In fact, one of the Brahma Sutras is etena yoga pratyukta. By these arguments the philosophy of yoga is set aside. And there the commentators say that the philosophy of yoga is set aside but the techniques of yoga, the meditation techniques are welcome. You see one interesting thing about Advaita Vedanta is that we have borrowed many things from the preceding philosophies. From the Nyaya, the Advaita Vedanta borrows the techniques of argumentation, anumana, debate. From Sankhya, the very, we keep talking about pure consciousness, witness consciousness, but it's actually, it's a contribution of Sankhya. We have borrowed from Sankhya the conception of pure consciousness. We have borrowed from yoga the wonderful techniques of meditation. We have borrowed from Purvam Imamsa's school how to interpret the Upanishads. Upanishads are the fundamental texts of Vedanta, but the masters of textual interpretation, the modern term is hermeneutics, are the old school of Purvam Imamsa, Kumari Labharta and others. We have borrowed from them. And taking all of it together, putting it together, assembling it, we put the stamp Vedanta on top of that. We put Brahman on top of it and say Vedanta. If you open the box of Vedanta and look inside, made in China. No, yes, so we have to give credit. I think it's Newton who said, I stand on the shoulders of giants. So in the same sense, we have all these insights from the whole of Indian spiritual tradition, but all of it is put together, and then the great insight of Vedanta. So not bhakti, not yoga, not karma, not dharma, then what is Vedanta? Let's once again ask, what is Vedanta? Now we are getting warmer, closer to the question, but closer to the core answer, what is Vedanta? If we were to describe Vedanta in one sentence, and believe me we can, as Swami said it's a vast vast literature, it's an ancient tradition, 5000 years back to the Upanishads, and yet you can describe Vedanta, Advaita Vedanta, in one sentence, and we all know it, Tattvamasi, the Mahavakya, the great great sentences. Great not in length, because Sanskrit, you can have very long sentences indeed. I've seen sentences covering the entire page without a break. But short sentences, but great in terms of being profound. Atato Mahan, in terms of profundity and deep depth. That thou art, that meaning that which is worshipped as God, Saguna Brahman, the reality behind this universe. Thou meaning you, the individual. You and that are the same thing. It's a little difficult to express in English. In Sanskrit, the expressions are so powerful, very easy to express. What is meant by Vedanta? It says, in Sanskrit, you can very easily rattle it out, you know, pancha-kosha-vilakshana-atma avasthatra-sakshi-atma. You the self, who are the witness of the three states of waking, dreaming, and deep sleep. You, the self, which is beyond the five sheets of the physical and the vital and the mental and the intellectual and the causal, the anandamaya, the panchakosha vilakshan atma. So that atma is meant by tattvam asi. Let's look a little deeper into this. It's really a very profound analysis. By the way, what I'm going to say now, it's a remarkable idea, but I don't take any credit for it. It's either in some old Sanskrit commentary or some monks I've heard who don't know English, but they have said this in Hindi. Tat tvam asi, that thou art. That meaning, in a very simple way, you can put it, that meaning God, the God of religion. Thou meaning the individual, jiva. That is Ishwar or Saguna Brahman, thou meaning you. Now that seems to be a very radical statement. Does it mean to say, I am God? No. No, not in that sense. What it means to say is, when we investigate these two polarities, I, the individual being, what am I when I investigate? There's a technical term for this, tvam padartha shodhana, again going back to Vedanta Shastra. The analysis, investigation into who am I or what am I and an analysis into what is God and then you come to a synthesis, seeing that what is the reality beyond God and beyond individual. Here you see the big difference between Advaita Vedanta and all the other theistic schools of Vedanta. In fact all the other theistic schools in different religions. Religions of the world in general and other devotional schools of Vedanta, they stop with three things, a triangle, God, individual and the world. Jiva Jagat Ishwara. There is the world which you experience and there is you. You are there, you experience a world with other people in it. And we have a faith, a belief in God. So you have a triangle set up and religions end with that, the theistic religions. Advaita Vedanta goes beyond that, says that there is a deeper reality, a higher reality, beyond the individual, beyond the world and beyond God even. And that it calls the absolute, Brahman, existence, consciousness, bliss. Sat, chit, ananda. And it says your reality is that sat, chit, ananda. And if you would realize that, you would realize Brahma Satyam, that alone is real. And what about the world? Jagat mithya, the world is an appearance. And what about me? Am I an appearance or a reality? Don't worry, you are real. But you are real as the absolute. Jiva Brahmaiva Naapara. So it reduces the entirety of experience to one absolute reality. And it insists this can be understood, realized, within quotes, experienced. I am being careful for those who are technically nitpickers. And that is the purpose of spirituality, to realize yourself as that Brahman, aham brahmasmi, the teacher teaches you that thou art, tattvamasi. The student shouldn't say that thou art, then there will be an endless go back and forth between the teacher and the student. The teacher says that thou art and the student should realize I am that. Aham brahmasmi, I am Brahman. Let us stay with this statement a little longer. Very interesting. It gives you a deep insight into what is Vedanta. Spiritual life. You can have two broad approaches to spiritual life. Look at that statement. That thou art. That meaning, by now we know. That meaning God. Thou meaning you. Now, there can be two broad approaches to spiritual life. Even in the religions of the world, you see these two broad approaches to spiritual life. Even in the religions of the world, you see these two broad approaches. One is that centered approach to religion and spiritual life, God-centered. And another one is that thou, you know, the inquiry into the self, a set of religions and another approach to spiritual life can be, who am I? Search for God, that's one way of spiritual life. And what am I? Who am I? That's another approach to spiritual life. And one can see why this should be so. After all, look at the structure of our experience. Any experience any one of us ever has had is always subject and object. I experiencing this universe. I am experiencing that. If you ask the question, what is the reality about yourself, about myself, that is the inquiry into thou, into the individual. If you ask the question, what is the reality about this universe, that's the inquiry into what religions call God. So there are these two broad approaches. Now think about it. Apply it to the religions of the world. Christianity, what is it about? It is about the Father in heaven, about God. Islam, it's about God. Judaism, it's about God. In fact, all the Abrahamic religions are God-centered, theistic religions. And that's why one problem in the West has been, because this is the only kind of religion that the West has been used to, they find it very confusing. Here, people find something like Buddhism very confusing. How can you have a religion without God? Whereas in India it is no problem at all. For thousands of years, Buddhism has been there for 2500 years, Jainism even before that. Buddhism, Jainism, even some of the schools of Hinduism, Sankhya. Even in Yoga, though God is there, God is secondary. So these are religions or spiritual approaches which are not about God. In Buddhism, there's no talk about God. It's openly agnostic. In Jainism, there's no talk about God. But they are religions, less like any other. So there are religions which are God-centered. In Hinduism, also, there are so many religions, or so many ways which are God-centered. Sri Ramakrishna's devotee of Kali, the Shakta approach, worship of God as the divine mother, worship of God as Vishnu, worship of God as Shiva, these are all God-centered approaches. That, that, that centered, keep this in mind, that, thou, that thou art. So there are these religions which are God-centered, and there are religions which, I won't say self-centered, that sounds bad. I'll say they're religions which are self-enquiry based, based on self-enquiry into what am I. Buddhism, Sankhya, yoga. Though yoga mentions Ishvara, but only as an aid, as a help to realizing oneself as the Purusha. So yoga, Jainism, these are schools or religions which are based on self-enquiry. Not so much. They either ignore the question of God altogether, or in some of the schools are openly atheistic. There's no God. But they're all based on inward inquiry. Even among spiritual seekers, right here, you will see there are these two broad divisions. You may not have noticed it. I have noticed it. When I was in our main monastery, I used to teach the young people who had come to become monks, brahmacharis, novices. And I would ask them, why did you become a monk? What are you looking for? And I would get broadly, why did you become a monk? What are you looking for? And I would get broadly these two kinds of answers. One group would say, I'm searching for God. I'm looking for God, God realization. That appeals to me. Another group would say, God is good, fine. But I'm really interested in who am I? What am I? Who am I? You see self inquiry-inquiry. So these two broad approaches. And when you compare these two approaches, you find some distinct differences. The God-centered religions and the God-centered mentality is likely to be devotional, worship-oriented, likely to be dualistic, likely to be temple, church, mosque oriented, likely to be ritualistic, likely to be in a broad sense, ritualistic, lots of worship and food and celebrations, joyous. And in contrast, you will find the self-enquiry based religions, they tend to be more monastic in nature. Think about Buddhism. They tend to be more of an inquiry, meditative, rather than devotional. They tend to be a little more intellectual, inquiry based. They tend to be more meditation hall-oriented rather than temple-oriented. Think of a Buddhist or a Jain center, right? Both of these have their advantages and disadvantages. Bear with me. It is leading somewhere. We are still with the question, what is Vedanta? But you'll see where it is leading. Both of these approaches have their advantages and disadvantages. The God-centered approach and the self-inquiry based, the that centered approach and the vow-centered approach. What are the advantages and disadvantages? The great, great disadvantage of a God-centered approach, especially in today's world, is that the God-centered approach starts with and proceeds with for a long, long time on faith, belief. If you start with questioning and skepticism, very difficult to follow the God-centered approach. If you say, how do I know God exists? Well, the book says so. I don't believe the book. The saints say so. I don't believe the book. The saints say so. They were deluded. Then it is very difficult to begin on that path. The God-centered approach, God, the existence of God, is open to doubt. That's why in all the God-centered approaches, you will find a great deal of effort is put forward into proving the existence of God. In Christianity, you will find, many of you may not be aware, there are actually proofs of the existence of God. There are. If you Google it, now you will find it. In Christianity, St. Thomas Aquinas, he talks about the five ways, the five proofs of the existence of God. In fact, recently I think Rebecca Goldstein wrote 36 Proofs of the Existence of God. I bought the book thinking there will be 36 proofs. No, it's a novel actually. It's nothing to do with the existence. So he talks about five proofs of the existence of God. And I can see people looking interested. Wow, proofs of the existence of God. And I can see people looking interested, wow, proofs of the existence of God, don't get too excited. If you actually look at the proofs, you will find if you believe in God, well and good, you will say, yeah, that's nice. If you don't believe in God, you won't be convinced by those proofs. In fact, one of the leading philosophers, I forget his name, I think Kenneth Appiah or somebody, he was training to become a priest. And in his studies, he came across the proof he was training to become a priest and in his studies he came across the proof. He was training to become a priest and came across the proofs of the existence of God. After reading the proofs of the existence of God, he decided not to become a priest. He became a philosopher instead. That he said, after reading the proofs, I cannot believe in the existence of God anymore. Not that I disbelieve, but I don't think these are conclusive proofs. In Hinduism, the great Nyaya philosophers, they developed several proofs of the existence of God. Udayanacharya, who was after Shankaracharya, he developed nine proofs of the existence of God. Again, all rather underwhelming. So why did they do this? In the Hindu context, it was the attacks of the Buddhists. So the Buddhists mounted a challenge, the two-fold challenge. Where is this God you speak about? And also, where is this eternal soul you speak about? So an attack on the Hindu conception of Atma, an attack on the Hindu conception of God, Ishvara. And the Nyaya philosophers, they defended the Hindu conception of Atma and attack on the Hindu conception of God, Ishwara. And the Nyaya philosophers, they defended the Hindu ideas of God and Atma, Ishwara and Atma. So my point here is, notice how much effort is put forth in trying to convince others and yourself God exists. In contrast, in contrast, nowhere, nowhere, you will find any effort put forward to prove that I exist. Nobody really doubts his or her own existence. If you doubt, then who is the one doubting? That one exists. So I do exist. Even Descartes, who started with this project of doubt, that whatever I can doubt, I will dismiss. The great project, Rene Descartes. But where did he stop? I exist because surely I am thinking that is this real or not? If I'm thinking this, this I cannot doubt. Then I exist. I exist because I think, then I exist. I exist because I think therefore I exist. The Kojito-Orgosum, the famous conclusion. So Descartes ends with the one indubitable fact that I exist in all the, I can't resist this silly joke. I saw a cartoon once, Descartes sitting for a cup of coffee in a Parisian cafe and the girl comes up and asks, Monsieur Descartes, another cup of coffee? And heian cafe. And the girl comes up and asks, Monsieur Descartes, another cup of coffee? And he thinks, and he says, I think not, and immediately disappears. I think, therefore I exist, so I think not. Yesterday, while coming down for dinner, I heard some of the devotees. Somebody was asking, how many Vedantins, I heard some of the devotees, somebody was asking, how many Vedantins does it take to ring the bell? It's a variation on the joke, how many X, Y, Z it takes to change the light bulb. Have you heard of those series of jokes? So somebody asked, how many Dekartians does it take to change the light bulb? And it says none, because the moment the light went on, they were so shocked, they stopped thinking, and they all disappeared. Vedanta would change that. Instead of saying, I think, therefore I exist, it would say, I exist, therefore I think. You know, there's a subtle point there. Even when we are not thinking, in deep sleep, when the unconscious, knocked out in coma, not thinking, or in deep meditation, even that's an experience. It's not an absence of experience, it's an experience of absence. If it's an experience of absence, to whom is the experience happening? You are still there. You are the witness of all your thoughts and you are the witness of the absence of your thoughts too. So even when you're not thinking, that not thinking is also lit up by your presence. So anyway, in the Tao-centered approaches, there's no doubt that I exist. But the problem is, there's a problem. The advantage of the Tao-centered approach is that there's no doubt that I exist, but the problem is this. I exist, but the problem is this. I exist, but my existence is a miserable existence. I have so many problems. I have old age, death, relationship problems, parking problems, all sorts of problems. So what if I exist? That is the problem, isn't it? So now, whereas God's existence, no doubt, if God exists, God is wonderful, omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent, doesn't even need to park. So extraordinary, God has no problems at all, wonderful, glorious existence, but doubtful existence, if God exists. Whereas in our case, no doubt we exist. There's no doubt at all. Nobody has ever seriously doubted our own existence. Even the Buddhist who says there is no permanent eternal soul does not doubt that there is a continuing series of consciousness flashes. So that's what the Buddhist says. So our existence is undoubted, but a miserable existence. Problematic existence. Unproblematic, doubtful existence. Problematic. Undoubted, certain existence. That centered approach. Think about all the religions of the world. They are infected with that problem, doubt. In today's world, how will you stand up against Richard Dawkins, Christopher Hitchens? He's passed away, bless his memory. But Sam Harris, Daniel Dennett, the new militant atheists, how will you stand up against them if you take a theistic approach? Whereas the other one, undoubtedly I do exist, but so many problems. Now, if you have noticed, I haven't brought Vedanta in it at all. Now I'm going to say, why did I say all of this? What does Vedanta do? That thou art, what it does is it brings these two together. What Vedanta, the great insight of Vedanta, Dvaita Vedanta is, what you reach through the God-centered approach and what you reach through the self-enquiry approach, that based approach, that based approach, thou based approach, you reach the same reality. By bringing them together, Atman is Brahman, that thou art, the realization is that indubitable, follow this, this is actually stunning, that indubitable, undoubtable personal existence is also the infinitude of God. The unproblematic, infinite nature of God and the undoubted, certain nature of yourself are combined. So you have a certain, undoubted, infinite existence. That is what you come upon in Advaitic realization. If one truly understands Advaita, the more I read and study and try to realize this, I see this is an undoubted truth. It's just that we don't see it. When you see it, it is beyond any doubt. It's absolutely blazing forth all the time, completely undoubted and completely problem free. This is the core idea of Advaita Vedanta, that thou art. Your existence, which is infinite, your existence, which is certain, but we surround it with problems. Vedanta shows you those problems. Take them up. They are either the body's problems, they are the mind's problems, they are the intellect's problems, they are body-mind-intellect problems. And Vedanta shows you how you are not the body-mind-intellect. avasthatrayasakshi panchakosha vilakshanaatma You are not any of them. The moment you see that I am not any of them, the limitations imposed by body, mind, and intellect, when they disappear, you realize your infinite self, which is one with God. When you realize that, you see that not only is there no problem, there never has been. This whole conception of a problem and trying to get out of a problem, this is what is called Maya in Advaita Vedanta. It's remarkable good news. Not only that, not only that, it provides a foundation to all the other religions which have come before, which seems to be so contradictory. But this Vedanta, it provides, it does not dismiss, deny the other religions, the other approaches. It gives you the rationale for them. What is actually happening in those, you begin to realize. From a Vedantic perspective, you can say, great, when somebody comes and talks about Christ or Krishna. And you can say, great, when somebody comes and talks about mindfulness and the impermanence of the empirical self. You can say, great, when somebody comes and talks about mindfulness and the impermanence of the empirical self. You can say, great, I know. I know what you're talking about. Both work very well. I've got time for asking what is Vedanta one more time. What is Vedanta? Now let's ask this question one final time to Swami Vivekananda. We have narrowed it down, setting out many things, drilling deeper and deeper, come upon a core idea. Now let's back up and expand outwards. Swami Vivekananda says, practical Vedanta. He said Vedanta has first and foremost been practical, then only a philosophy. Because what we have been saying so far sounds awfully abstract. Vivekananda says no, no, no. It has always been practical and then only a philosophy. Swami Vivekananda says the way to realize this is through, definitely through the way of philosophical inquiry, but also through meditation, through love, through service, karma, bhakti, yoga, all of which we had left by the wayside, we take it back in now. By one or more or all of these and be free, Swami Vivekananda says. Realize the divinity within by meditation, by knowledge. He clearly, in fact, uses the word philosophy. Philosophy has got a bad name, that it's some kind of intellectual thing. No, no, no. The original meaning of philosophy was Jnana Yoga, a philosophical inquiry into reality. Swami Vivekananda uses the word philosophy when he talks about Jnana Yoga by philosophy, by psychic control, by love or by work, by one or more of all of these, the four yogas, and be free. That is the whole of religion. Books, temples, doctrines, churches are secondary details. And on this approach, actually in traditional Vedanta, whether Advaita or Vishishtadvaita, Advaita. All of these yogas have actually been accepted. Shankara, he says, by knowledge, Jnana devakai valliyam, by knowledge alone one gets enlightenment. But karma is essential. It's the first step in spiritual life. Bhakti is essential. Shankara in fact says, it's essential to have karma, upasana, then Jnana. Ramanuja just reverses the order. Ramanuja says, yes, jnana, knowledge is important, but first karma, first action, then jnana and then ultimately devotion is important. Devotion is what takes you to liberation. So all the ancient masters included all the yogas. They didn't discard them. They included but they put it in hierarchical order and Swami Vivekananda sort of flattens the hierarchy and he says, any one of them but recommended all of them together and they will lead you to enlightenment. Swami Vivekananda says morality is based on this Vedanta. He says the essence, in fact this is a good answer. What is Vedanta? Swami Vivekananda would say two things. The divinity within us and the oneness of existence. The divinity within us and the oneness of existence. Notice that thou art. Can you put them together? When you enquire into the thou, into the individual, what do you come across? The divinity within us, not body, not mind, beyond body and mind. Chidananda roopaha shivoham shivoham. I am the witness consciousness. I am Shiva. I am Shiva. That is the divinity within each one of us. But that divinity is not separate. It's not that there are a hundred divinities sitting here. I know you're all divine, but it's one divinity. According to Advaita Vedanta, it's one divinity. Sankhya says we are all separate spirits. But Vedanta says that which is beyond body and mind right here is one. So, not only the divinity within each of us, but that divinity within each of us is one reality. That's what he means by the oneness of existence. That thou art, Swami Vivekananda puts it in this way. The oneness of all existence and the divinity within each of us. And this oneness of existence Swami Vivekananda says, this is the surest foundation of morality. I have no time to give a lecture on the Advaitic foundations of morality. There is a fantastic article. Swami Bhajananandaji has written an article. He is a very senior monk of our order, a wonderful sadhu and a luminous mind. He has written this article, the ontological ethics of Swami Vivekananda. About 20-25 pages where he surveys the entire field of morality and ethics, different theories from East and West and shows the deficiencies of those theories. Teleological, utilitarian theories, deontological theories and so on. And then he comes to how Vivekananda used Advaita Vedanta, Vedanta as a foundation for morality. What Swami Vivekananda said was, because it is one reality, if I hurt somebody else, if I cheat somebody else, if I lie to somebody else, I'm hurting myself in the deepest sense. Because we are all one, just as we take very good care of ourselves, we should take equally good care, if not more, of everybody else. The golden rule, treat others as you would have them treat you. This is something found variations of them. It is found in every religion of the world. Went to the United Nations. I found it's written there, the golden rule. But now you know, why should I treat others the way I want them to treat me? Why? It sounds just and fair, but still, why? If they are different, I could exploit them. I could have them treat me well and then treat them very badly. Why not? Because Vedanta says you and the other are not separate. You and the other are one reality. Therefore, if you treat them badly, you are actually injuring your deepest self, your spiritual self. So this is the foundation of morality. Vedanta, what is Vedanta? Vedanta is strength. Swami Vivekananda, based on this idea of oneness and divinity within, he gave certain principles. He said, what strengthens you is true. Reject as poison what weakens you, Vedanta gives strength. What unites all of us is true. What divides us, reject as false, because oneness of existence. What makes you more unselfish, that is truth. What makes us more selfish, reject it as false. Unselfishness and oneness are connected. The idea of harmony of religions. You see, it's all very easy to say it's one. But when we look at the world, it's many. If the truth is it's one, and it is appearing as many, at the level of the many, what should we practice? You can't practice oneness, because you can't lump everything together into one reality. You can't put all the religions together into one religion. No, no, that won't work. Oneness at the core, expressed as the plural, as the many, then what we have to practice is the harmony of the many. Is living together, learning and assimilating from each other. This great teaching of harmony of religions, which again Swami Vivekananda takes from Sri Ramakrishna, from his master Sri Ramakrishna. Harmony of religions. That is also based on Vedanta. That follows from Vedanta. In many of the talks which Swami Vivekananda gives about Advaita, he makes sure to mention how Advaita preserves the preceding steps in religion. It does not discard, doesn't say that now I have a deeper understanding, now I have a better understanding, I'm superior, that's so primitive, let it go. No. That has been useful for me and it will be useful for many who come later on. Not only that, it's not a question of truth and falsity. He said it's a question of moving from lower truth to higher truth. That is also true. So harmony of religions, that follows directly from Vedanta. And finally service. Service. Great teaching of his master, Shiva Jnana Jiva Seva. Serve all beings, all sentient beings, knowing them to be none other than God. Notice, knowing them. Shiva Jnana, knowing them to be none other than Shiva. He did not say, worshipping them to be none other than Shiva, believing them to be none other than Shiva, meditating upon them, not Shiva Jnane, not meditating upon them to be none other than Shiva, which is all very good, you can do that, but literally it's a fact that Shiva alone is appearing in all these forms. And so what should be my attitude to Shiva? The only thing that can be there is worship. And what is worship in day-to-day life? Will you throw flowers and chant mantras? That might be nice once in a while, but not particularly useful. So worship in day-to-day life is the action that we perform, is whatever we can do for others. I remember Swami Ranganathananda, I'll close with this, he said, what is spirituality? When I close my eyes, I find peace within. When I open my eyes, my attitude is, what can I do for you? This is spirituality. See, the whole idea of that, thou art, tattvam asi, oneness of the universe and the divinity within. Both are expressed here. Close my eyes, the divinity within, of course I find peace. Open my eyes, the same divinity outside, of course I want to serve. What is Vedanta? I counted, even if you haven't, we have asked it seven times. What is Vedanta? In 20 seconds I'll run through the seven times. What is Vedanta? In 20 seconds I'll run through the seven times. What is Vedanta? The core philosophy of all the sects of Hinduism. What is Vedanta? The end of the Vedas, the Siddhanta of the Vedas, even the cutting edge of knowledge. What is Vedanta? Upanishad Pramana, the text called the Upanishads, Bhagavad Gita, Brahma Sutra, and all the schools that follow from it. What is Vedanta? What is it not? It's not a journey in space or time or object. It's a journey from ignorance to knowledge. What is Vedanta? What is it not? At its core, it's not karma or bhakti or dhyana. What is Vedanta then positively? Sixth, it is that thou art. And all that followed from that. And finally, at its broadest and its most magnificent declaration in the world today, what is Vedanta? Swami Vivekananda's idea of the oneness of existence and the divinity within expressed as practical Vedanta. Thank you very much. Thank you so much. Shanti shanti kare. Om shanti shanti shanti hari om tat sat shri ram krishna rupana mastu. Om shanti shanti shanti shanti hari om tat sat shri ram krishna rupana mastu. Om shanti shanti shanti shanti hari om tat sat shri ram krishna rupana mastu. Om shanti shanti shanti shanti hari om tat sat shri ram krishna rupana mastu. Om shanti shanti shanti shanti hari om tat sat shri ram krishna rupana mastu. Om shanti shanti shanti shanti hari om tat sat shri ram krishna rupana mastu. Om shanti shanti shanti shanti hari om tat sat shri ram krishna rupana mastu. Om shanti shanti shanti shanti hari om tat sat shri ram krishna rupana mastu. Om shanti shanti shanti shanti shanti hari om tat sat shri ram krishna rupana mastu. Om shanti shanti shanti shanti shanti hari om tat sat shri ram krishna rupana mastu. Om shanti shanti shanti shanti shanti hari om tat sat shri ram krishna rupana mastu. Om shanti shanti shanti shanti shanti hari om tat sat shri ram krishna rupana mastu. Om shanti shanti shanti shanti shanti hari om tat sat shri ram krishna rupana mastu. Om shanti shanti shanti shanti shanti shanti hari om tat sat shri ram krishna rupana mastu. Om shanti shanti shanti shanti shanti shanti shanti shanti shanti shanti shanti shanti sh Om Tat Sat Sri Ramakrishna Rupanam Astu We are very grateful and thankful to Swami Sarva Priyananda for his wonderful, illuminating talk on what is Vedanta. He served from the, we call it shukta to payas, means from beetles squash curry to rice pudding. Which means he served the entire meal, there is nothing more to add. That is the way we express. When Swami Vivekananda returned to India in 1897, he was in Madras. He said dualism of Madhva, qualified non-dualism of Ramanuja and non-dualism of Shankara, all three are the one, same. Then some people asked, no other teachers have ever said that kind of thing. Swamiji said, because it was waiting for me. Then he gave a beautiful example. You take the photograph of the sun in the morning. Every hour you take a photograph. Each photo will be different. But you are taking the picture of the same sun. So the same truth, as he explained, that non-dual Brahmany has been viewed by different philosophers, different saints, from the different understandings. Sri Ramakrishna emphatically said again and again to his disciples, प्रमकिष्णों पर अपना पर जब जब वो पर्वादाश्यों के लिए बहुत बहुत कहा, इश्वरेर इति कोरते नहीं। जो नहीं जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब जब Infinite. The three words he used Bostu parichchedo Kala parichchedo Mean thing which is limited by time And desho parichchedo, limited by space and limited by object. We perceive this world these two ways, both two, object, time and space. Show me Vivekananda major sentence, beautiful sentence, when does the space begin? The moment you have a body. When does the time begin? The moment you think. And then? Cause and effect, cause and effect. In this whole world, there is nothing but cause and effect, cause and effect, cause and effect. Kārtyakāraṇa-śambhava. This Brahman, this infinite, is beyond these three. It can be experienced only through this non-dualistic knowledge. Anyhow, I shall not take time. We will have to go to to our Hindu temple, the cultural function. I really appreciate Swami. He really gave a beautiful talk. Flawless. Anyhow, we are very grateful. I was asking him when I called him, that he will have to come and give a talk in the morning here and the afternoon there, then in the evening he will go back to New York. Busy person. Anyhow, thank you everybody. Let me say a simple prayer. May my body become pure. May I be free from impurities and ignorance. May I realize myself as the light divine. May my mind become pure. May I be free from impurities and ignorance. May I realize myself as the light divine. May my soul become pure. May I be free from impurities and ignorance. May I realize myself as the Light Divine. Aum Shanti, Shanti, Shanti. Peace, peace, peace be upon you. .
 Welcome to this special module on Inner Development, Discovery and Management of Self, VEV 731. Let me introduce to you Pravarajika Divya Prananandaji, the instructor of the course. She is a monastic member of Shri Sharda Math, currently stationed in Ramakrishna Sharda Mission, New Delhi. She served as the principal of Nivedita Vidya Mandir School for many years and is currently the editor of journal titled Samvid. She has been travelling both within India and abroad as well to deliver talks on applied yoga and Vedanta. And it is an absolute privilege to have this course offered by here for IIT Delhi students. A little about the course. So it is a pass and fail course. I hope everybody understands that. And the structure of the course is the following. So we have 9 theory lectures. The duration of each lecture is going to be 1 and a half hours that sums up to 13 and a half hours. We will have, so we have half a credit left for the practical and since the number of credits is actually the half the number of hours that you spend in practicals. So, you will have a practical for 1 hour duration that will account for half the credit. The schedule for the theory lectures has already been shared with everybody. Regarding the practicals that will be done as per mutual convenience and availability at the end of the session. The passing criteria is to have 11 out of the total 14 hours of classes attended. That's the pass criteria. Any other questions, please feel free to contact me. Let's begin. We'll begin with a prayer. So, welcome to this course. I am happy about the title chosen for the course, Discovery and Management of Self. So, I am also glad to hear that you are all interested in the philosophical and psychological aspects of your own being. So, this is what we are going to discuss as part of this course because it is pretty obvious you see what is the point in managing everything in the outer world without managing yourself first. If you know everything about everything and you do not know how to manage yourself, you have no idea of how to manage your thought and your emotion, your will, who you are actually. If this concept is not clear, then there is no point in trying to manage things just fixing things outside, because you are a participator. So, getting a hold over yourself, this is the intention of this course. That is why we are going to introduce as part of your practicals, meditation and also some amount of activity based on this what we are going to study. In the theory lectures mainly we are going to concentrate on I have been asked to concentrate on eastern and western philosophical aspects of self, what we mean by this I sense in us. So, it will be something interesting to you because who is not interested in in the I everybody is interested in knowing who he is is not it. So, we will be a it is an inner exploration we will be covering the eastern and western aspects of self we will be covering the human personality paradigm as it is understood what is the human personality about who we are and how we are functioning, this was something we will be discussing. And then we will be discussing mind and perception, because you see your entire experience of life has to do with your perceptions both external and internal. So, how does this happen, what are the criteria and how can you augment that perception, how can you make it subtle, so that your experiences and life are according to your wishes and not according just to the external situation. So, mind and perception is something we will be studying. Then we will be studying self-management skills, which means how mind management basically, how do you handle your thought, emotion, will, attitudes. So, this is a very important science, trying to know how I function and how I can function better. So, all of this will be under observation. Of course, you will be studying the three different types of quotients, because intelligence is not just restricted to intelligence intelligent quotient hm not just your IQ, it is also about EQ, SQ, VQ there are number of factors involved. So, we will be studying all of them. Then you have techniques of mind management as part of this course, which obviously, is very important. Then you have neuroscientific perspectives on mind management hm. So, something of neuroscience also we will be studying, what light exactly our philosophies throw on all these topics, we will be studying that. Then you have modern problems and ancient remedies, in order to how to counter stress, depression, all these negativities in the modern youth for that what were the ancient remedies some discussion on that will be there. Then we have research methodologies which means qualitative and quantitative research first person third person research which is based on all this how to improve the quality of human thought and emotion and the human perspective which means apart from thought and emotion is there anything about you and how do we enhance that awareness of yourself in order to handle thought and emotion better. So, this will be under observation and then of course, applied yoga vedanta will be studied. All of this we will be studying as part of this course and then of course, your practical sessions will be there. This is the theory portion which I told you about. Now today's session is especially entitled, Who am I? Now this is a question we all ask, everybody asks this question, what is the unchanging element in me? Of course, we know we are functioning through this body mind complex. As soon as a suppose I just ask you close your eyes and think about what you mean by I you will say a picture of my body appears in my mind, but please see this you are seeing that picture of your body, your mind is seeing it, your intellect is acknowledging it and the entire thing is happening in your awareness. So, all these elements are part of your personality, when you say I it includes your body, it includes your mind, it includes your intellect, it includes your awareness what we call consciousness. So, all of these together constitute the human personality, but you are essentially what what is the unchanging element here, if you actually appears through this question you will see it is only the I sense awareness is the permanent factor here, the rest is all changing. Your intellect is growing every day, your mind is changing constantly, your body of course, is changing. If I showed you a picture of yourself as a baby you may not recognize it, that much the body has changed, the mind is constantly changing, intellect is growing, but awareness is the constant factor. So, if you can handle yourself from this standpoint you see all the rest of you what you are calling yourself can be handled. So, this is what actually meditation and spiritual practices aim at catching the essential you the unchanging you identifying it isolating it to a certain extent, you will see actually you are not isolating anything, you are just being your real self and the rest is actually objective to your experience. So, getting a hold over just now in the theory it may sound something fantastic, something wonderful when you do the meditation practice you will see this is the perfect possibility. In fact, it is your essential nature to be distanced from merely mind activity, this is your essential nature. So, all this will be coming into this course. Let me tell you that this is not new knowledge although in in different ways yoga is being practiced all over the world and so many streams of yoga have come up this is a very old ancient practice in the Vedas and in the Upanishads which is actually the essence of the Vedas you see this is a 4000 year old not even 4000, 4000 BC Indian scholars place Rig Veda at 4000 BC which means they are the oldest texts available to humankind. Here you will find research into this self, what we are calling self, the real unchanging I. So, at a time when civilization itself had not sprung up in most parts of the world, at that time this level of research you can call it consciousness research, research on consciousness the science of consciousness that was taking place here in a very deep way. Some of the questions in the Upanishads which is the actual essence of the Vedas if you read those questions you are simply struck dumb. What are they exactly trying to discover and what are they trying to tell us by means of these questions. See they are trying to discover the unchanging you, that aspect of you which is permanent which is you can say like a background substratum to all your mental activity to your physical being it is behind all of this. And yet they found that it is due to the presence of consciousness that the mind is becoming conscious that is why you have conscious experiences. Have you ever thought like this why do I have conscious experiences? What is the difference between an inanimate thing and me? I have conscious experiences. What is the source of that? They found consciousness to be the source of that. Even the body is enlivened functioning as a conscious entity by itself appearing to be conscious by itself because there is consciousness somewhere and so, the entire research was to track this source of your being pure consciousness itself this is what is called the Atman in the Upanishads and all of this literature is devoted to discovering this Atman in the Upanishads and all of this literature is devoted to discovering this Atman discovering the source of your personality you can say the source of your true being the source of your mental functions pure consciousness it is a discovery towards that so if you read the Upanishads you will find this is the recurring theme there, Atmanam Vidhi, Mrityu Samrityu Maapnuvati Ya Iha Naneva Pashyati, which means know yourself, a person goes only from death to death who does, who sees only multiplicity here, only diversity, he does not know the source of things, the unitary source of everything. You will find mantras like this that to a message with a gate to chandogya upanishad again and again you are that supreme brahman you are that consciousness because of whose existence everything else appears to exist it borrows existence as it were it appears to be conscious as it were because there is this source of consciousness which is the supreme reality whether you call it Brahman, Atman these are all the words used in the Vedas essentially essentially they are pointing to the very heart of existence and the entire research is on this. So we have 4 Vedas and we have a number of Upanishads. These Upanishads are nothing but Vedanta itself means Vedonka Saar, the essence of the Vedas. Now the word Upanishad, it actually means Upa plus Ni plus Saddhatu with Kvipratyay. It means sitting close to a teacher to do what? In order to get this knowledge, get the knowledge of the supreme existence, unitary existence of all creation, to get this knowledge, Brahma Gnan, Jo Kehte, Brahma Vidya, to get this sitting close to a teacher. Remember Vedas were transmitted by word of mouth. In those days they did not have such communication systems, isn't it? So, it was transmitted that is why it is called Shruti, it has to be heard from the teacher, it has to be contemplated through the words of the teacher and this is how the Vedas were transmitted this knowledge was transmitted over the centuries. Today we are getting it in its purest form. This knowledge is considered so very important in this particular culture everywhere in the world actually, because this is to do with yourself please see this this is self knowledge . They are introducing you to your real being if you actually try to track the eye sense in you it will take you into this research . Who am I question what am I actually, how do I function? All these become so very important. Because if you live in a world where you do not know yourself, you do not know how you are functioning, you will give into things external readily. But if you have a hold on yourself you know how this particular system functions, then in any place you can handle yourself well. In very trying situations also you can remain very stable and balanced, is not it. And even if it there was no practical usage of this knowledge itself is important is not it, just to know who I am is very very important for its own sake because it liberates your mind, it expands your mind. Knowledge in its own right on its own stand it is sacred, it is it is always been considered sacred in our culture because it leads you towards the truth. So, the second aspect of it is its practical usage, but primarily it is a system of knowledge very profound knowledge which is giving you an introduction to your true being this is what self knowledge is about. This word Atman is used to indicate your self the unchanging aspect of you as I told you. Now, in the Upanishads this self is has had been found through all the research that they did it was meditative, is not it? Jab koi is gnyan ko paane ki koshish karta hai what does he resort to? Enquiry and meditation. There should be self enquiry and meditation based upon that. So, this entire research is based on meditation that is why a meditation practice is being introduced for you. A certain calmness of the mind is required in order to pursue this research. Through their practices what did they find regarding this Atman? You see, aapne suna hoga, I am using the word consciousness constantly. What does consciousness mean? That which gives you conscious experiences. What is the proof that there is consciousness? The fact of conscious experiences, isn't it? Now, if I ask you, what is the proof you have hands and feet? You will say that I am able to do things, that I am able to walk, that is the proof that I have hands and feet, you say that I am able to do things that I am able to walk that is the proof that I have hands and feet, what is the proof that I have eyes that I can see. Now I am asking you, you have conscious experiences so that should be proof of what? Consciousness obviously, so it is a research into this consciousness, this is what self knowledge is actually about and this consciousness has been described as sat absolute existence in the scriptures. What does this mean? A dekhe in your own experience you can catch this. You require awareness to validate the existence of anything else, is not it? Only if you are aware, then you can perceive something. If you are not unaware, if you are unaware, you cannot perceive anything. So, awareness is required to testify to the presence of anything else. So, what will be required to testify to the presence of awareness? There cannot, this is an logical impossibility. Because you are aware, you perceive. that is why it is aware absolute existence belongs to awareness alone, did you catch the point. It is a logical impossibility to say that well what something else is required to become aware of awareness, it is only due to the presence of awareness that you are able to perceive so absolute existence belongs only to the Atman that is why it is called Sat it is of the very nature of absolute existence many such terms are used everything has a logical very rational stand you see Upanishads the Vedantic literature is very scientific I told you it is a science of consciousness. So, it is very rational and logical they will tell you it is eternal Atma Atma vastu jo hai wo sanatan hai shashvat hai why is it eternal does it mean it is going to persist forever and ever what they mean to say is actually eternal is not the right word because it includes time consciousness is before the mind when mind begins time begins. So, in a sense that is why it is it transcends the mind. So, it transcends the element of time that is why it is colloquially speaking we say it is eternal shially speaking we say it is eternal. So, like this every single word, epithet, every attribute which you are giving to describe the Atman has very profound something behind it which you have to discover only through deep level enquiry and meditation. It is not just that I am going to introduce a few concepts of philosophy and psychology to you thoda sa intent focus chahiye is class may if you are able to give that you will catch this knowledge just like that it will be something very interesting because it is a discovery of yourself your true being hm. So, just focus and you will be able to gain this. Now, let us go into, I will tell you how actually Vedanta was transmitted and it is studied. Right here you can grasp a few facts about it, not that you require a 3D model to understand what they are talking about. See it is called phenomenological enquiry actually, it is a way of enquiry which will give you a sense of what we are talking about right here and right now. It is a way of penetrating within, ispar ek poora session hai hamara, what we are calling phenomenological enquiry but here right now, I just want you to sit straight, yes come on sit straight, get a little focus, does not matter if you do not close your eyes but sit still and you will see how this phenomenological enquiry works, aapne baare mein hi chintan hai ye, few fundamental facts about what we are going to study will become clear right now. See just think about this when you are thinking, suppose now just now if you close your eyes and see your mind activity there are number of thoughts in your mind, just now you are listening to me thoughts are there, even when there is a the absence of thought you are there you as awareness are always there thoughts are coming and going out of that awareness can you see this clearly hm. Dekhiye aap soch rahe ho jab aap sochna bandh karte ho you are acknowledging the stopping of thought which means you are there, is not it? You as awareness are seeing your thought process objectively, you can also see the absence of the thought process. So, basically I want to just point out to you, open your eyes, just look at this thought is objective to your being. आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको आपको thinking, because you were always objective, thought was always objective to you, you were not identified. If you make this a kind of practice, in that 5 minute meditation session you see this is part of the practice, thought is always objective to your being, that is why you can acknowledge the presence of thought and also the absence of thought. You as awareness continue always always thought comes into that awareness moves out next thought comes it moves out to yehi par aap yeh pakad sakte ho awareness is more fundamental to the thought process thought can be made objective to my being if I rush and identify with the thought if I'm over excited about the thought I may identify with it but then I I am over excited about the thought I may identify with it, but then I have willingly identified, otherwise it was objective to my being right. So also your body, just now think and see, see your toes, you are aware of your toes, you are aware of your feet, you are aware of your shoulders, you are aware of your face, you are aware of your posture sitting here still, you are aware of your body, your body is not aware of you, right. Is your body aware of you? You are aware of your body. What does this mean? Awareness belongs to you the subject, body is objective to your object of your experience, objective to your experience. You see your mind, your thoughts are objective to your experience and your body is objective to your experience, you the awareness are the subject, the rest is an object to you. When you think something, what how do you think? You say they are my thoughts, you do not say me the thought, is not it? You you feel something nice, you say they are my feelings, I had such beautiful feelings, I had such happiness, they all belong to you, they are not you. This is always your experience, only you did not notice this basic fact about yourself. Now in this class, today's session especially you should notice these fundamental facts about your being. This is called phenomenological enquiry which means from the standpoint of the subject how does the thing feel. I am not going to bring an apparatus to tell you how you feel, not a third person perspective, first person perspective experience is always in the first person you must learn to do phenomenological enquiry in the first person and you will see the truth of what they are saying . This will appear like a huge theory thought is objective to my being I am the self this appears like a fantastic theory this is no theory you are working functioning like this always all the time you you the awareness the unchanging awareness functioning through a body mind complex this is the definition of you in the Upanishads consciousness functioning through a body mind complex is the jiva is the unit whom you call me I and you are not just body and mind. So, some of these things see one more thing let me introduce here. The nature of your I sense they say it is completely separate, completely different from your body, which means what? Now suppose you have a tummy ache, stomach ache, kuch McDonalds mein kha liya or you got a tummy ache. Now you cannot pinpoint where the pain is, what the pain is due to, kya ho raha hai, you just feel a little uncomfortable that is all, but an external instrument is required to tell you where the pain is. You cannot pinpoint the pain because the body is objective to your experience. The whole medical science will tell you this, it is required for you to know what is happening in your body, you cannot know it right. One more thing there is there are experiences in you when you are quite apart from your body and yet your sense of existence continues. For example, in your dream state suppose who is the current cricket superstar I think Virat Kohli right. So now Virat Kohli suppose you got you adore him so much that you got the body think Virat Kohli right. So, now, Virat Kohli suppose you got you adore him so much that you got the body of Virat Kohli let us say. Now, you do not mind you are very happy about it. What I want you to see is you as a conscious entity as a conscious being continue without reference to the physical body in the dream so in your dream you don't doubt it isn't it in fact you're very happy that you have the body of Virat Kohli so what I'm saying is conscious experience or entity continues body changes mind changes but you continue always yeh pakad mein aaya aapko? samajh mein aaya? there is an unchanging I in you if you try to understand these few points with utter stillness of mind you will see they are absolutely true there is a conscious being continuous unfluctuating in me who continues even when everything else changes. Without reference to this body and mind, it continues. So that is why the Upanishad is telling you, you are essentially the Atman functioning through a body-mind complex. So, this is not a theory, we are analyzing our own experience. This is everybody's experience. It is happening to all of us. Only we have not learned to think like this. So when we talk of self-knowledge, self, you always are, you are the self. You are functioning through a body-mind complex. You must learn to understand it this way whenever we refer to myself I may the the the actual source of that I is consciousness itself this is what they are telling you if you suddenly ask where do I find that consciousness you know there is this little story Jo bolte even I think in Zen Buddhism they use it there was a a little, there was a huge ocean, Indian ocean in which there was a school of fish and one small fish was asking his mother, mother where is the ocean, I want to see the ocean. And mother said, the mother fish said, you are in the ocean and the little fish said, no I am in in water I want to see the ocean and the mother fish said but this water is the water of the ocean. This water is nothing but the ocean the whole collection of water is what we are calling ocean but you are very lean it is so obvious that you miss it you miss the point. So also jab aap pooste ho na aatma kya hai, what is the aatman, what is brahman, what is the supreme reality, you are that your awareness you see presently what you are feeling is your mental awareness it is a reflection of that and you are asking for brahman, you are asking for the ocean being in it. So, isko pakadne ke liye all you need is a very steady mind, a very stable quiet mind. If you have that Vedanta aise hi aap pakad paoge, if you do not have that manufacture it through yoga that is the means. You know we generally call Vedanta as the science of consciousness, yoga as the technology of consciousness. And here, the technology leads to the science. Technology is not a mere fallout for external purposes. The technology leads to the science. So if you still bring your mind to a certain level of stillness and stability, you can just know these facts. They will just enter your mind because they are already there. Consciousness aise vastu nahi hai which is external to you, you are the consciousness. That reflected in the mind is making the mind alive, that reflected in the body is making the body conscious, enlivened as it were. And then you are identifying with this body and mind and considering yourself to be only that. So, this is how the human mechanism is functioning only the human being has this capacity to reflect on himself and understand these basic facts you can do it by the power of yoga this intense stability inner stability of mind and stillness of body the human being can manufacture and that is why these insights can come into the human life easily. Toh yahi hai yog aur vedanta ki visishtata. It is a do it yourself science, you penetrate into it yourself. Remember every deep level science you have to do it yourself it involves you and any science you take up you will encounter consciousness even physical sciences will lead you to this. So, any science will lead you to this it is good to know how our ancients conducted this enquiry without any external instrument, equipment, without taking the third person perspective just by analysing thought, what lies behind thought, how did they arrive at this truth. To yehi technique hai, ek method hai. One more clue let me give it to you here. See there are three states you pass through, you are passing through every day you experience, jo kehte hai jagrat swapna sushupti, hm which means you are in the waking state and then you are in the dream state at night and you pass through a state of very deep sleep where there is no dream, these are the 3 states we pass through every day, right. Now, if you analyze these 3 states, you will see there is a common factor here, there is a common denominator to these three states. How do you know there is a common factor? See in your waking state, your senses are active, wide open and mind is also active, right. That is the waking state. You are experiencing this world. In the dream state, your senses are closed, but mind is active, subconscious mind is active and it is cooking up its own dream and you remember your dreams also. Sometimes you forget, sometimes you remember. So in a way, again that dream was objective to you because you are able to say something about the dream. About the deep sleep state also, the wonderful thing is you are able to say something about the dream. About the deep sleep state also the wonderful thing is you are able to say that you did not experience any objects, you experienced nothing as it were, but somebody should be saying that is not it. How do you know you did not experience objects in your deep sleep state, which means you were there, awareness must have been there for you to know that it was a state of deep restfulness where I did not know anything. So, you see this simple logic, it is actually called a Mahatarka of Mandukya Upanishad. It is telling you there is an invariable in the midst of these variable states of experiences. There is an invariable running through them a common denominator to all these three states and that is why it points to the ontological reality of the self. Consciousness is always there. It is not essentially inferential, it is experiential. If you have build a very sensitive mind, you can know it by yourself through these techniques and this is the common denominator of all your experiences. That is why they say consciousness is fundamental to mind function because it is there mind is functioning. Mind is functioning, body is functioning, you identified body mind and you function as a particular individual, but the source factor is consciousness. To dekhiye ye bahot bada science hai hai na, there is no belief system here, there is no believing in something. If you carry on the experiment on yourself through a very steady apparatus, you will arrive at these facts yourself no question of belief. So, this is the kind of outlook which you find in the Upanishads. They were these rishis were stalwarts in a sense spiritual stalwarts, they were very of very strong body and mind and that is why this inner penetration it it becomes something very obvious something natural to a well developed mind. If this inner penetration you see when Max Muller tried to describe you know how he described the Vedic Rishi he used to say they were of that type because they did not have a public to please and critics to a piece. You are just after knowledge for its own sake you are just tracking being pure consciousness for its own sake if you pursue knowledge like that you will get the very heart of knowledge. So, all these techniques are trying to show you the glory of this knowledge self knowledge and it can it will actually lead you there I told you all that you require is a very steady mind which you can manufacture through meditation . Now, if I if we put all this together do not think this knowledge is exclusive to this culture. Although, yes the greatest emphasis it found, you can say the greatest importance was given here and the greatest research for the longest periods of time in our in world history took place here in India. There are many mystics all over the world who have felt the truth of this that consciousness is primary even to mind function. Consciousness is the fundamental thing about human life, whether they called it the atman or self or whatever that is a different thing, naming is a different issue altogether, but the essential content is the same. This is in has been intuited by a number of mystics everywhere. You know as far back as 11th century, there was one ah mystic called Avisinna. He was a Persian polymath who was who was also a physiologist, hm he was a doctor of his time. And he conducted a very simple experiment, a experiment be yehi pe aap kandak kar se, it is a thought experiment. You see he said if I manage to get a man floating in air, it is a thought experiment. So, you can imagine anything. Suppose you were floating in the air, imagine it you are floating in the air cut away from all sensations, absolutely no sensations of the external world. In fact, you do not even have the sensation of your body, you are floating in the air, imagine this. Now, he put the question, if you are floating in this in in the air totally cut away from sensation, do you have a sense of your presence or not? Do you have a sense of your presence or not? Do you have a sense of your presence? Yes, I am there and I am cut off from all sensations. So, he said you see self-awareness is always there. This is knowledge by presence and not knowledge by sense data. You see it is a such an important observation. What is he telling us? This is knowledge by presence not knowledge by sense data. And later on you know this argument was taken up even by Descartes and then he made this famous statement I can abstract from the supposition of all external things, but not from the supposition of my own consciousness. I can never separate that from me, I can never exclude that from my experience. I always am whether there is sensation or not, whether there is mind activity or not, whether there is memory or not, awareness is always there. Though this experiences the common experience of all mankind, because it is the truth about your personality, it is the unchanging truth about you. And this truth has enormous effects on the human personality, because I told you if you essentially understand you the subject are experiencing everything objectively you get a hold over the objective otherwise the object will carry you away ye dekha hai na apne life mein see when we talk of practically applying yoga and Vedanta this is where the practical application comes when you know you are distance distanced naturally from your thought process from your emotion you can handle them better. So, this has enormous usage we will go into it in further detail initially you must know these things about self knowledge about the self which we are discussing. At first glance well to put it in an equation form this ah the equations may appear quite bizarre it is something like quantum mechanics you know it may appear somewhat strange to you because what is this fundamentally telling you it is telling you mind activity mind itself is external to your experience it is external to your experience, it is objective to your experience. So, what do they arrive at as a result of this? They arrive at the fact that if you think you are the body time and space and causation all this you are in time space and causation because you are identified with the body. If you think you are the mind, time and space and causation are in you because they are in the mind and if you think you are awareness, everything is in you, subject and object is one seamless reality. So this has to be arrived at not like this, but through experience, which means through a certain amount of yoga. And then we will understand the depth to which they have gone, that is the way to understand it, do not think only through logic you can understand it, you can arrive at it through logic, but to experience it because usually what you mean by experience is getting into that state, for that a certain amount of training of body and mind is required although self-knowledge experience of self is again not objective isn't it, it is your own being it is of the nature of being and becoming, it is the nature of becoming the subject being what you really are but it requires a certain amount of training anyway now I want to go into Indian philosophical systems, the orthodox and heterodox philosophies, in order to help you understand how they have observed. You see this Vedic thought which we were discussing, that the essence of that is the Upanishads, right, Vedanta. Now this condensed into 6 6 systems of philosophy when did it did this happen see the Vedic thought 4000 BC I told you very long back but these philosophies were formed in between 6 century 6 BCE to 4 BCE first 4 centuries of the common era between this period these 6 philosophies were framed as it were the frameworks were created. So these philosophies are condensates of Vedic thought by different philosophers through their own practices they arrived at certain convictions which they made into philosophies thought constructs these are but all of them the specialty of these Shardarshan kehte hain ko the speciality of these philosophies is they all speak of this Atman they all speak of a unit of pure consciousness as being the essential nature of the human being with slight variations. But this is the essential thing about the human being all of these philosophies dwell on this just look at this slide here you have all the six philosophies described and very clearly you can see usually they are combined like this nyaya vaiseshika, sankhya yoga and purva mimamsa and uttar mimamsa,ar Mimamsa is called Vedanta. So the culmination of their thinking is in the Vedanta, but it starts with different, I told you different philosophers according to their understanding, they frame these, made this huge philosophical frameworks. Nyaya is basically was propounded by Gautama in 2nd century BC, it deals with correct thinking, how to think properly properly right, something similar to western analytical philosophy. Then Vaiseshika is another philosophical system by Kannada 6th century BC, atomist and pluralist it is atomic realism it is called. I do not want to go into the details of it because today what we are getting what we are using I will only focus on that. And this is also a kind of a scientific analysis of the nature of reality, Vaiseshika system also deals with this. Then you have Sankhya very important system of thought because all other systems are using Sankhya psychology. It was framed by Kapila first century BCE, dualistic realism Purusha and Prakriti you see he held reality to be twofold of the nature of consciousness and consciousness is consciousness itself but immovable Prakriti is unconscious but movable. So he said reality is consists of both of these Purusha and Prakriti and he propounded many Purushas that is the uniqueness of the Sankhya system. Consciousness is because there are so many individuals there are so many consciousnesses in a way this is what it means and the three Gunas this also comes from this philosophy you know about Sattva Rajas and Tam, according to the nature of the mind one understands reality. So this concept also comes here. These are all the main ideas I have put it in a very short form for you to understand each philosophy. Then comes the yoga philosophy, this is also deeply linked to Sankhya because the philosophical framework is the same but yoga is theistic you see it is it was propounded by Patanjali in 2nd century BC dualistic framework theistic philosophy it believes in a creator God Ishwara and Ashtang yoga is its speciality we will go into all this in detail this is just an introduction and of course the goal is considered Kaivalya. Then you have the Purva Mimamsa, it was propounded by Jaimini, again a Rishi and this is actually he propounds that it should be according to the prescriptions of the Vedas, whatever your work, whatever your practice. So pluralistic realism here, two schools Prabhakaras and Kumarilas, this is concerning Purvam Vimamsa, then finally is Vedanta. In a way you can say the entire thinking culminated with this philosophy. This is essentially the Upanishads. Vedanta namu Upanishad Pramananda Upanishads means Vedanta the essence of the Vedas and it is an absolutist philosophy knowledge based although there are techniques which are called Upasanas meditation techniques propounded there and then you have its logical presentation in the Brahma Sutras there are six sub schools many times we will be talking about Advaita Vedanta in perception theory and all that but remember that Advaita Vedanta alone is not Vedanta there are six schools there is Dvaita, Vishuddha Dvaita, Shuddha Dvaita many such schools are there different levels of thinking you can say but finally you can say Vedanta is the culmination in a way the science of consciousness culminated with this system where they discovered there is only one consciousness reflected in different minds. So there appear to be different individuals, but consciousness is not plural in the plural not that there are many consciousnesses. So, this unitary vision comes to us from the Vedant and that is why this is considered to be the culmination of Indian philosophical thought. Now amongst all these systems remember these are the orthodox schools of Indian philosophy why ortho they are called orthodox because they are Vedic they are based on the Vedas they believe in the Vedas they have drawn from the Upanishads I told you their condensations of Upanishadic thought as perceived by different Rishis in different periods of time but this yoga and Vedanta ye do jo philosophical systems hai this has come down to us as live traditions today. Because yoga is a psychological philosophy it deals with your mind any person if you straight away ask him who he is he will say well I am my mind what the mind is that the man is he feels himself to be mind if he thinks deeply he will come to awareness, but usually he thinks he is the mind. So, this when you think you are the mind this philosophy is very very very useful to you because it is dealing all with the mind with the different prakriti jo bolte hain, the different functions of your mind structural and functional classifications of mind, how the mind behaves, the different states of mind and how to change the nature of the mind, everything to do with mind you will find in this philosophy. So, it is very useful to us today all the yoga techniques that you see all over the world derived in some way from these philosophical systems, from these practices. So, this is the source matter and Vedanta has come down to us as a live philosophy because it is the truth about you . So, the truth cannot remain hidden. So, these two systems of thought are something which we are using even today. The rest of the system not that we are not using, but they are not that popular, they have not come into common thinking, but these two systems are very very strong even today. In fact, any practice or any understanding of religion, philosophy comes from these streams. So, these are the six orthodox schools of Indian philosophy. This is not all of Indian philosophy, this is not all of Indian philosophy. You may know even Buddhism arose here, Jainism arose here. So, you have heterodox schools of Indian philosophy also. We have you see these three, they are Avaidic which means they are not based on the Vedas. Ye jo charvak the they were pure materialists, they believed matter is everything, what I see is the truth, there is no mind, no awareness, no such. So, gross materialists they are called the charvaks. So, unki philosophy thi well just the material world is the only reality that there is. So, live well, live in the senses and live well no matter what. So, this this school also existed for some time and then Buddhist schools Buddhism is a very huge philosophy you know it it is not based on again it is mainly phenomenological and it it propounded a very practical ah kind of yogic kind of techniques for people to dive into higher knowledge. So, you have this eightfold path, different schools are there, very strong techniques are there, wonderful terminologies there, strong practices are there, very strong techniques are there, wonderful terminologies there, strong practices are there and that is why this is a very popular philosophy. Then and of course, living icons are there, people who are following this path. Then Jainism of course, this is also a wonderful philosophy and a number of practitioners are there. So, you see there are orthodox and heterodox schools of Indian philosophy. Then I will tell you the very gist of what we have been discussing in two slides, before we move on to the next portion, when before we move on to how exactly we can experience what we are talking about.. Isko karke hum we will end today's session, but before that I want you to see this. See we ask this question initially who am I? Now here I want you to just observe you see even as the earth and moon are lit by borrowed light, the body and mind become conscious due to the presence of the Atman. This is the crux of what we have been discussing so long. Because there is consciousness, you have conscious experiences in the mind. You become body conscious and the body appears an in living entity to you. Now, how can this be known? The light of pure consciousness is reflected in the mind which is considered subtle matter in Indian philosophy. The mind becomes aware and generates our sense of being. The buddhi designates this empirical awareness as I. One can track this I back to its source which is pure consciousness. Did you get the point? You see because of the presence of this unit of pure consciousness, the mind its reflection is caught by the mind. Mind is considered subtle matter in our philosophical systems and the mind gets lit up as it were becomes conscious. It had the mind has this sense of ahankar it is not actually ahankar is actually identity but this I sense aham you can say you know a very clear mind will have the throb of aham I sense is because furan kehte hai sansrit mein iska matlab hai you just feel the sense of I-ness without identification with anything else so if this can be caught in the mind you will understand your mental ever awareness is nothing but a reflection of a source of pure consciousness this is what they are telling you so this throb this I sense can take you to that source if the mind is well trained. So this is the methodology through the process of enquiry and great steadiness of mind you can reach that source this is the method adopted in the Vedanta. The method of which are just by tracking the eye sense, the source of that eye sense, it can take you to the core of your personality. This is a possibility and that is why if you ask, actually the question should be what am I, is not it? The who is not another person there, it is consciousness. So, if you ask what am I, you will see this is the basic picture you get from these philosophies pure consciousness or the witness consciousness that is the real nature of the human being what it is called Sakshi. Then the condition consciousness the mind just look at that picture that is the reflection of the witness consciousness which gives you the feeling of iron and externally the whole thing is enclosed in a physical apparatus which is called body. So, this is you if you ask what am I this is you then over this of course, there is your name your form your specialties your attributes your the identities you have taken up, hm your epithets everything titles, but essentially this is how they are tracking the core of the human personality structure, hm. Did you get this point? Now, how do we come to this practically? I would just like to dwell a little bit on this. I briefly discussed vichar, vichar means enquiry. Just by very acute concentrated one pointed enquiry you can the eye sense will lead you back to the source. If this happens you know it happens instantly, it is there is no process to it that is why many times in Vedanta you don't find a process like in yoga not a technique because it's a flashing intuition which you encounter if the mind is very clear the intuition will come by itself no process is even required that's why vichar is a very solid way to go in if you are ready if you are not if you're still asking ye kaise experience kiya jaye then you must take up a meditative practice which is what this yoga is about you take up a way of going in and the common practice suggested in yoga apne apne agar thoda yog study kiya ho Raj yog, Patanjali yog koi bhi yog, you will see essentially they tell you chitta vritti nirodh, stopping the thought process. They tell you that, is not it? The very first sutra of yoga sutras is yogasthu chitta vritti nirodh, stop the thought process, why? Tada drashtu svarupe avasthanam. So, that the witness consciousness stabilizes itself in its real nature that is the end of this process of yoga. So, that you are able to find out who you really are that is the purpose. Now, which technique you adopt depends upon how qualified you are, how ready you are for the experience. If you are, if enquiry does not get you the experience immediately, there is the process of yoga. It is a graded path, it is a technique to go there. I told you here the technology leads to the science. So, in in this mark you have to arrest the conscious mind in the path of yoga. This is the common path. Usually it is the yogis who become the Vedantis usually because unless a person's the mind is very firm and stable that itself means he is a yogi then only vichara is possible so how do we do that you have to work on the mind that is why entire self management there is no managing the self, the real self is your glorious true being which is the Atman, but you you can manage the mind. It is essentially yoga is managing the mind, managing your vrittis, controlling them, changing them for the better, making them positive and arresting them, this is what yoga is about. So, if you adopt a technique you see even normal creative activity, you can augment it enhance it if you remove the conscious mind. Have you seen this? You are all brilliant students, you must have seen this. If you are not getting the solution to a particular problem, you leave it for some time. After sometime it will just pop up in your mind. Ye dekha hai aapne? Why does this happen? Conscious thought process has been removed temporarily. Now there is a very beautiful incident on this you know which comes in the life of Rabindranath Tagore. Let me tell you that incident here. See he was a great lover of nature. Isn't it Rabindranath Tagore? Kitna, kitna achi kavita hai likhte the vo. So it would just come out of him when he was in the midst of nature. One day he was travelling on the Yamuna and he was alone in the boat and there was a hood to that boat and it was dusk the the sun was setting. So, he went inside that hood and he lit a candle and he tried to write some poetry, but somehow it did not come out of him for that day. On that day he struggled and then after sometime he stopped because it was not coming out. Then what did he do? He put out the candle and came out of that hood, he came into the open on that boat and then he suddenly saw the sun had set and the moon had come up and it was a full moon night and the moonlight had flooded the entire place. The moonlight if you have seen the magic of moonlight on waters the glisten and the very surreal atmosphere it creates. So, that kind of a very beautiful atmosphere had been created there his mind became so still it actually went into a state of yoga and tremendous poetry started coming out. Then he went back and recorded it without even lighting that candle. The candle is your conscious mind. If you shut it for some time consciously, candle is basically thoughts. If you remain conscious and put down thoughts, shut out thoughts, it will usher you into a different dimension altogether without losing your awareness you should do this isre yog shakti chahiye if you can go into that enormous create there will be an outburst of creativity and if you do it with the whole mind not just with the conscious mind even with the subconscious mind self-realization will occur you will go into the very depths of your being so this is a very solid yogic technique let me tell you there is a deep connection between yoga and Vedanta a you only through experience you can know it what is the connection between yoga and Vedanta see in yoga me hum kehte hain if you commit pran and mind to the heart center your awareness will remain continuous and unfluctuating if your awareness remains continuous thought is an interruption in that you will naturally set aside thought just like how words are an interruption to your thought process, isn't it? When you are deeply in thought, you don't speak because words are an interruption. So also thought is an interruption to the continuous flow of awareness. You will set aside thought if you manufacture that level of intense augmented awareness this is the key connecting yoga and vedanta. It is possible to enter into this knowledge just by going to the very depths of your mind and that is why yoga gives you this equation you know the basic equation is mind is equal to thoughts bubbling upon consciousness . So, if you remove thoughts consciousness will remain over the equation is m is equal to t plus c where m is mind t is thoughts c is consciousness. So, c should be equal to m minus t consciousness should be equal to M minus T. Consciousness should be equal to mind minus thoughts. Isiko hum yog kehte hain. Chit vritti nirod means mind minus thoughts. So, you see very definite techniques are there for you to arrive at the experience we are talking about. Karna chahiye. All this is about actually doing the thing. If you are not doing it, you will not get anywhere, it is not merely about thinking, you can enquire and think after getting established in yoga, then it will lead you to the truth of the thing. But essentially, it is about handling your mind and body in a way, which will take you to this essential truth. So regarding the method because many people ask these questions you know, samajh liya concept samajh mein aaya but how do I get there, how do I do it? So there are definite techniques, this much you should know, we will dwell more upon this in the course of this these talks, these lectures and course, the practical session you have. So, essentially the picture of yourself which emerges from all this thinking is the body is the vehicle of the self, the mind is also the vehicle of the self, you the self are functioning through the body mind complex. Is not it? This is the picture which comes to you. You know a great scientist his name was George Wall. He said a foothold outside the world is required to solve the major mysteries of the world. Science solves the minor mysteries he said, but to solve the major mysteries the mystery of consciousness, to solve mysteries like these you require a foothold outside the mind, self knowledge gives you that foothold. That is why this penetration, that is why this science is so important. Standing there you can understand the functioning of the mind, it actually gives you a foothold in the infinite. So, you can understand the finite world better. So, this is this this great science has a huge contribution to make. In fact, some of the greatest thinkers of this world have all subscribed to this knowledge naturally because it is most obvious to your experience, it is most obvious to your sensitive thinking that you must penetrate into this knowledge. And the great usage of it is let me tell you you know the very outlook of any culture depends upon what it considers the human being to be. If you think you are only the body, you know the crux of the matter lies here. If you think you are only the body, you will only want a material civilization, only that which satisfies my body I will only aim at that. So, we will have a very sensate civilization. If you think you are the mind, we will have a intellectual civilization, is not it obvious? We will have a knowledge society. If you think you are the self, the atman, you will have a value based society, a society entirely based on values because consciousness is the only factor which is common in all of us. Bodies are different, minds are different. So, a kind of inclusiveness comes through this research. You have found the common factor in all creation. This naturally makes for a very inclusive outlook, a sense of oneness with all existence. So, we will actually generate a society of values. You know when the this experience come you do not have to tell the person he has to be good or ethical or do things for others. The other person is me in another form this will be the perception and that is why naturally it will be a philosophy of acceptance, inclusiveness, it will be a philosophy of oneness. That is why this knowledge is so very important to the evolution of humankind. You know animal evolution, human evolution there is a difference not that all evolution takes place in the same way. In the human being after physical evolution, after your survival needs are met it will go to psychosocial evolution this is how it proceeds. From psychosocial evolution it goes to spiritual evolution. So, to augment your evolutionary process this knowledge is vital absolutely important and this knowledge removes all fear all misery comes from fear isn't it you actually analyze your states of negativity and depression somewhere fear is the root when you have a sense of yourself apart from everything else fear will not remain a spiritual mind fear will not be there deep-rooted fears will not be there so a natural cheerfulness will remain you discover higher and higher levels of happiness in. You discover higher and higher levels of happiness. Happiness is actually proportional to awareness. You discover this by yourself and it gives you a very very universal outlook because you know any science is universal. Science what it is in India is what it is in USA, is not it? Borders we have drawn, but science cannot change. Science is always universal because it is the truth about existence. So also this science, it is completely in tune with modern aspirations. What do you consider modern to be tell me? In today's world what does modern mean? means a vision which is pan humanistic, trans ethnic and all inclusive scientific right. In addition it is non ideological also, it is not another belief system. So, this is what we consider modern. So, this knowledge is completely in tune with modern aspirations, it is pan humanistic, it is trans ethnic, it is non ideological, it is very scientific and hence universal. Are you seeing this? And that this is all the great gain of this knowledge. What I am telling you is effectively to be able to combine objective knowledge and subjective knowledge is real genius. And I expect this from IITs, you see you have this benchmark for excellence, real excellence will come when you have the knowledge of the self and objective knowledge together. And you know how to place where, what to place where. If you only have knowledge of the objective world and no knowledge of yourself, you cannot function properly, is not it, is not this true. So, yeh jnan yahi deta hai it will give you a comprehensive view of human experience and human goals human aims what human life is about combining effectively subjective and objective knowledge this is the kind of education Vivekananda wanted. So, if we can do it effectively here through these courses, through all these discussions, I think our purpose will be achieved. Let us try for it. So, let me end this session here, time is up, we will have some announcement about the practical. So, now first thing is the meditate 5 minute meditation has to be practiced every day. The video is has been sent to you all of you have got it. It is just a 5 minute meditation. Ek baar dekh lo usko practice karte jaana. Why I am telling you, what I have been telling you about distancing thought, you the awareness are possible, yeh natural ho jayega usko karne se you will see it for yourself it's your own experience and so you can handle the thought process better, anger and depression, hatred and all this will not come into your life, lot of balance will come. So, that 5 minute meditation is to be practiced every day and the final practical will be discussed, we will discuss it and let you know, ok. We will stop the session here for today. Thank you.

 I will be back in a minute. Om Asato Maa Sadgamaya Tamaso Maa Jyotir Gamaya Mrityor Maa Amritam Gamaya Om Shanti Shanti Shanti Today we will be studying research methodologies first and third person research and we will also be studying something about consciousness and life, life process so some idea you must be having about what we mean by consciousness and life now what exactly is life? life? You know just through science you cannot explain it, you need some amount of first-person research. What is life? It is the streaming or the expression of consciousness through this mechanism is what is called life, isn't it? The manifestation of consciousness through this body-mind complex is what we are calling life so then if I want to better my life, if I want to have richer and more fulfilling experiences I must work to a certain extent on this mechanism, on the subjective mechanism so today the thing is in yoga and vedanta the primacy has been given to consciousness always and the subjective mechanism. The whole understanding is like that that if you train the subject properly you will get very good knowledge of the object also of the objective world also but if the subject is untrained you don't know what you will get To illustrate this today I will tell you a story from the Keno Upanishad see what you can make out of this story apne akshardham dekha hai sabhi ne dekha hai there they are showing this story in the form of laser display hai na wahapar in that laser display they are showing this story from the Kinopanishad. So it's, the story goes like this. You see, once through a story format they are telling you something very profound. So please pay attention to the story. What is happening is there is a periodic quarrel between devas and asuras in heaven, isn't it? And during one such fight it so happened that the devas won and they were very jubilant, they had driven the asuras out of heaven and they were very jubilant and full of merriment and going to the extremes and then it suddenly occurred to you know who the devas are the gods Agni, Varun, Indra they are actually offices in heaven they are in charge of each element very good people with a lot of good karma they go and become the devas after death and they are put in charge of an office because they are responsible they are good people so its not god it is the gods its small g not the capital G so they were rejoicing with their victory and then suddenly God thought that if this small victory one small victory over the Asuras makes them so exuberant then well they will simply go out of control after some time so let us teach them a lesson they should know who is responsible for the victory, who is it who is actually animating their personality their body mind complex and what is responsible for their victory actually so in order to drive home this lesson this brahman actually embodied took the form of a yaksha a being or very luminous being and appeared before them at a distance and as soon as the gods saw they were wondering who is this being we dont know anything about him so bright and luminous and then Indra who was the king of the gods he told them go and find out who this being is, he appears like a Deva himself and then when, whom did he first send? He first sent Agni, go and find out who this luminous being is and Agni went there and he could't make out who this being is and then that Yaksha asked him Ki aap koun ho? Who are you? and he said don't you know me? I am Agni, I am the god of fire I can burn down everything in this universe I am very powerful, you don't know me you see the arrogance, the pride has come and then this being said Oh I didn't know you are Agni but yes I have heard so much about your might can you do one small thing for me can you burn this bit of straw and he kept a bit of straw in front of him and Agni tried with all his might to burn down that straw and he couldn't nothing burnt and then he was very ashamed so he just turned back and then he came and told Indra that there is some mysterious power in this one small bit of straw I'm not able to burn then Indra said okay let's find out and he sent Vayu and Vayu also went and he asked the being who are you and the being said but please tell me first who you are and he said don't you know me I am the most powerful God I can blow out everything in this universe so you don't didn't recognize me and he said no I didn't well give me any challenge and I will meet it and then he kept the same straw that yaksha and said well blow out this and why you tried and tried and tried the one who creates storms and everything on earth hurricanes but he could not blow out that bit of straw okay this is a story just to give you a very profound teaching and then he came back he also got ashamed and came back and he told Indra there is something very strange going on I am not able to do a very minor thing even and then Indra thought okay let me myself go and see what this is about so he goes there and he sees that this yaksha is standing there there is no straw as such and then he asks him who are you and then the yaksha before saying anything he just vanishes but indra does not leave that place and he starts wondering that this must be some power which we are not aware of which is which cannot make agni perform his function which is due to which the vayu is not able to perform his function some great power this must be so what could this be and then suddenly there came umahai mavati that is supreme knowledge this brahma vidya the embodiment of that knowledge in the form of a woman a devi and then she came there and then Indra asks her ki mother can you tell me who this yaksha was who came and taught us this kind of a lesson, we could not do simple tasks in front of him and then she pointed and said you see that was Brahman, the supreme reality, it came to teach you who exactly performs action, what in you performs action, who is it who did all this this victory against the demons and all this how were you able to perform it he came to teach you that you see if his will is not there you couldn't even he couldn't blow blow that piece of straw he couldn't burn down that straw and she then told him that that was Brahman itself the supreme knowledge came to you in that form to just to show you that consciousness is what activates the life mechanism, consciousness is what energizes the life mechanism it is due to the presence of consciousness that life is manifest that action takes place that anything happens due to that now if you study your own mechanism this is the teaching given by her to Indra and because Indra received this teaching he became the leader of the gods the other gods they did not receive this teaching but they they could see the yaksha isn't it so they were all actually it is said that they became the devas because of the touch of this supreme knowledge what they are trying to tell us is first of all they are trying to tell you the the primacy the importance of consciousness now apply this story to your own mechanism and see what is it that enlivens your mind? Tell me, we have discussed this earlier Consciousness is present, the reflection of consciousness falls in the mind, in your buddhi first that is why the mind appears conscious that reflection falls on the body and then the body appears conscious through this mechanism body-mind complex you are functioning in this world you are seeing the world of objects so the source of everything is that consciousness the activator, the one who enlivens jo sachetan karta hai, satar karta hai that which makes the mind function first of all that is consciousness so she is pointing out to this basic fact which is what yoga and Vedanta is about. If you track the source of your true being you will not get false values in life like arrogance, pride, all these things which we, it is not about struggling with the mind, it is about identifying the real I. Do you understand this? How did Indra and the gods reach the, get their lesson? By struggling with their mind and their thoughts, just by knowing the truth. What is it that is functioning through my mechanism due to which I am able to act, due to which I am able to think. Toh asal cheez ye hai. You see knowledge itself that's why they say it's the greatest purifier. If you just know what is it in your personality which is responsible for all activity anything you will know you will not attach false values in your life isn't it you don't have to struggle with anger and lust and pride if you just know who you truly are ye asal cheez hai so this is the story which is telling you in a in a very simple way dive deep into the source of your being first and then the body-mind mechanism can be handled like an instrument samajh mein aara hai wo ek yantra ho jayega aapke haath mein. Otherwise you will keep on struggling all your life with this body-mind mechanism which is not obeying you which seems to have a will of its own which you do not know how to control all these unnecessary problems you see most problems are mental isn't it we are a very our survival needs are taken well care of your body is safe but your mind all most of your problems are with your mind and you do not know how the mind is functioning actually. So all these problems can be overcome if you take the inside view go to the source of the mind and go to the source of your identity and you can handle your whole the whole human mechanism in a very efficient way you become the master of this mechanism otherwise you are like a slave of it have you seen this when you you get angry if you are not distance from that particular meditation you become anger itself you become the emotion itself so all these things can be controlled if you go to the heart of things this is what the Upanishads actually are telling you at the heart of any subject is consciousness at the heart of any science is consciousness you will encounter this problem you see the deeper you go into any science you will see you are encountering the subjective phenomenon of consciousness you have to answer it and experience itself you know experience is always in the first person is not it, is experience ever in the third person, first person is involved in the experience. So, without first person knowledge, knowledge of the subject and the instrumentation it is using it is difficult to dive deep into any science please see this. You will encounter this problem as you go deeper and deeper into your research in your own fields, you will encounter this problem. The thing is the word experience itself includes consciousness. See this. It is called a tautological statement, a kind of circular thinking. Now if you ask me, I am giving you an example of what a tautological statement means. If you say, well what is the proof I have a tongue? Aba bol rayo, that is only the proof. Is there any other proof that you have a tongue if you do not have a mirror to see? What is the proof you have a tongue that you are able to talk is the proof. So also that the fact that you are experiencing things means consciousness is at the heart of your personality paradigm. That is why you have conscious experiences. This is what they are hinting at. things means consciousness is at the heart of your personality paradigm that's why you have conscious experiences this is what they are hinting at it's there it's not a question of should I adopt a third-person methodology or first-person methodology the two are always connected this is what Vedanta will tell you the two are always you never saw anything purely objectively. It was always that particular object in your awareness is appearing as that object. See before you start by saying I am seeing this particular object you must observe properly what is the nature of your experience. It is much better to say in my experience this is this particular object. Given my equipment this is a paper just now. Given my equipment I am seeing what I am seeing in my awareness. Experience is where it's in your awareness. So these are certain fundamental facts which you should observe. Before we start today we are going to discuss research methodologies. Third-person research and you know what is first class I had explained it to you what third person research means what first person research means you see third person research if you are trying to study a subjective phenomenon objectively you will encounter a lot of problems. The problems were spelled out long backs in 1966 Nobel prize winner Perry actually Nobel laureate in 1966 he gave out this just observe this the third person research and its limitation. He says we are having problems with understanding consciousness because the inner sensations feelings concepts mental images and the like cannot be weighed, measured, recorded, photographed or spectrographed or chromatographed or otherwise recorded or dealt with objectively by any known scientific methodology. Toh theek baat hai na yeh? You are not able to record it in any way. It is a subjective phenomenon altogether. Now remember this when in Western philosophy, Western thinking mainly when they are talking of subjective experience or consciousness they are usually meaning mind function. In Vedanta it is not so, isn't it? We have been discussing Vedanta for some time now. In Vedanta it is not something to do anything to do with mind. Mind is an object of for consciousness to function through consciousness is completely separate from mind function but usually in Western philosophy and Western science consciousness means mind function so he is saying inner sensations feelings thoughts concepts all this come under mind function this you you must distinguish between these two because in these research methodologies aapke mann mein clear idea hona chahiye what we are meaning by consciousness and what western philosophy is meaning by consciousness Did you understand the difference? Then I will proceed Consciousness usually as it is used in western philosophy means mind activity In Indian philosophy, in Vedanta and yoga consciousness is not has nothing to do with mind it exists completely independent of mind function in fact if you try to know it through mind you will not know consciousness it is that due to which mind is able to function it is behind the mind this idea we had discussed some time back manasa namanute enahur manomatham tadeva brahmatvam viddhi nedam yadidam upasate kenopanishad that which enlivens the mind activates the mind but you cannot know it through the mind you can only know objects through the mind isn't it because mind our mind is turned outward just now so this is not an object in front of you this is the supreme subject so how will you know it third person research has this limitation what is third person research you are trying to understand a subjective phenomenon through objective causes and effects that is third person research when will you call it first person research when you are trying to understand the subjective experience purely through first-person analysis through your own experience then you will call it first-person research now first-person research methodology this is what this is where yoga and vedanta have the greatest contribution to make this is a very big science today. Try to understand this. In fact, the most authentic first person research methodologies are yoga and Vedanta. Isiliye toh combine karne ki koshish kar rahe hain science and meditators, meditation techniques. Why are they trying to combine? You have heard of the neuro-phenomenological method. It is trying to combine first You have heard of the neuro phenomenological method, it is trying to combine first and third person research methodologies. Because in this method, what are they trying to do? They are trying to correlate third person EEG data with first person experience of a meditator and they have been able to find very good correlates a very good you can say a kind of communion between the two. So how they are doing this you see regarding this I would like to give you Alan Wallace he is a famous American author his observation a potential revolution in the mind sciences is possible if we can integrate rigorous first person and third person methodologies in collaboration between cognitive scientists and contemplatives with exceptional mental skills and insights resulting from rigorous sustained mental training in observing and experimenting with states of consciousness why are contemplative being used tell me even here in IIT why we are called to do all this because you know a mind which is trained in meditation and yet is able to observe that phenomenon with mental training in meditation you know you get the ability to observe a mental state without participating in it. If you get this training this kind of experience what happens is you are able to deliver first person data first person understanding first person research understanding without mingling it with your thought emotion bias, bias, prejudice anything. This correlates immediately with third person data. That is why this combination method is being used. In fact, today this method neuro phenomenological method is being used to study a lot of mind function, conceptualization, will, how exactly the human will works and decision making, creation of a concept, how thought mentation works, emotion how does it work, to study all of this memory how does memory work, all of this neurophenomenological method is what is being applied. So understand we have to in a sense harmonize combine this first and third person methodologies. The uniqueness of the Indian scientific paradigm let me tell you that here you see in we are in a way conditioned I also come from science stream you know we are conditioned in Cartesian dualism you know subject and object are totally different in the western mind subject meant what did Descartes mean by mind I mean subject he meant mind please see this mind and body mind and object are different he meant by subject mind if subject and object are different he is saying mind and the world of objects are two different things yes but in Vedanta philosophy the subject is who is it mind it is consciousness consciousness and the object are not two different things in fact the object appears in consciousness isn't it this is what we are discussing, when will you say they are not two different things, why is the object not a different thing apart from the subject, because it has no intrinsic existence, it is dependent on awareness for its existence, in my awareness it is that object, no object is independent of your awareness, please say this, in your awareness it is that that object because it does not have this independent status you cannot say it is a purely objective reality outside of you. What it is you do not know in your awareness it is that object this is what we are telling you. So, because this is the situation your own experience we are analyzing this is not another theory we are constructing we are analyzing your own experience normal experience so if you analyze it this way you will see in in Indian Vedantic understanding the subject is consciousness and object is an appearance in the subject now if something is an appearance in awareness what status of reality will you give it? will you give it absolute reality? you cannot give it absolutely because it is dependent on my awareness to be that to be perceivable as that object so what what degree of reality will you give it? it is relatively real only isi ko advait vedanta mein there is a technical term called mithya hum ye term bahut wrongly use karte hain isiliye it has got messed up in our brain ye sansar maya hai mithya hai aisa sab use karte hain in talking it is actually a very technical term in advaita vedanta if something does not have independent existence it is called mithya it is not absolutely existing as that thing that is the meaning you understand so try to understand what they are trying to tell you by all this is there are degrees of reality only the subject is absolutely real because it has intrinsic existence everything else is dependent on that subject for gaining its existence as that particular object in a way the subject imparts existence you can say imparts consciousness and that is why actually if you read Shankaracharya's works you will see he says the entire field of perception there is only one thing only Brahman exists subject and object are you can say like bubbles in in that ocean of brahman subject and object itself you have created the division and it is your ignorance that divides them into two the object is always a appearance in the subject as a sub up come illegal try to understand the philosophical standpoint it is something very logical and rational actually if you see it as it is. So this is something I wanted you to know before we proceed. I do not want to go into the details of superimposition because it will I do not know if you will relate directly with it. But how you should understand it is you see from the standpoint of water the bubble is mithya is not it because bubble is nothing but water with a name and form but from the standpoint of wave bubble is not mithya right. Wave also has a name and form bubble also has a name and form, wave is more water than bubble. So understand how the word mithya is being used, from the standpoint of water, bubble and wave both are mithya but only from the standpoint of water, from the standpoint of Brahman the world of plurality is mithya because it is nothing but consciousness with a name and form in a particular formation that's all the essential thing is consciousness this how they are seeing it ye bhi humne thoda discuss kiya tha from the standpoint of gold the ornament is Mithya but from the standpoint of jewelry the ornament is not Mithya samajh mein aara hai same example I am giving you two three examples so try to understand how the two you see science and Vedanta how they are trying to see this world how they are trying to understand what in what ways we can research first and third person methodology means this in what ways we can research into reality there is an objective method there is a subjective method you have given full emphasis on the objective method through your science that is very good you must know everything about the world around you Vedanta is giving you knowledge of the subject and from inside how the vision is going to appear once you catch the subject well once you have gone deep into the mind what will be your perception like what will be your understanding like what will be your perception of object like this this inside view subjective science gives you. So, you must be able to understand both. Now in first person research let me now concentrate a little on first person research this novel method of neuro phenomenological method what it is going to give you is I told you it is it is bringing a wonderful synthesis between the experience of the mind in meditation and a neural signal data recorded in third person perspective. Ye kaise karte hain aap dekhiye, several well founded hypothesis regarding decision making will, free will, mentation, conceptualization, emotions all this is being studied using this method. See, step by step I will tell you how this method works please pay attention in studying volition what is volition? Will when you are willing something what exactly happens? Hum bahot baar kehte hai na haan maine soch ke rakha tha lekin ye cheez nahi hui ye mujhe karna tha lekin mujhe nahi kiya gaya also the will has failed somewhere now from the inside view they are giving you through this neuro phenomenological method how exactly will is formed in your mind you see the very first step which they have found this in a very scientific manner it is called libet's experiment I have taken it from the consciousness and cognition journal see the first step in studying volition for example it was found that an inner impulse that goes to become volition or will will start as a non-conceptual movement of in your mind what is going to become your will before it becomes a sankalp what is happening in the mind it starts as a non-conceptual movement in your mind now does this remind you of something a non-conceptual movement that vritti is this non-conceptual moment since this is a pre conceptual moment in your mind it is free of content please see this it is not a whole thought yet it is not a concept yet so it is free of content but it is a different moment in mind now both meditators and third person EEG data have caught this hm the neural signal analysis has caught this experience. Then the third point here in a general sense all behavior starts not not even from thoughts but from these pre conceptual moments of mind without content just the mind shakes and breaks into vrittis as it were then you start creating a concept then you fix your energy and make it into a will aise aaram hota hai, aapke sankalp aise aaram hote hain, gradually it becomes either emotion, volition, concept, intuition or memory. The fourth point you should note here is, thus conceptualization is it the first step in behavior, no it is the last step, see what an important idea they have arrived at. Conceptualization naturally becomes the last step. Thought that is not the first step to action, that is the last step. Uske aage bahut kuch hua hai aapke mann mein, you are not conscious of it, this has been tracked. You see this is what first person research does for you. It it throws light on areas which are purely objective research cannot track. Thus conceptualization is not the first step, but the last step and the trained calm mind can observe this pre conceptual readiness to act. This has been taken it is a paper on first person approaches in neuroscience of consciousness brain dynamics correlate with the intention to act from the journal I told you consciousness and cognition journal. Now the fifth point here for you to observe is thus the first person perspective obtained from an expert meditator in conjunction with neural signal analysis contributes in a very major way to our understanding of the neural underpinnings of voluntary acts. It is a voluntary act or you have thought of something, but what are the neural underpinnings of it, what happened before, how that act took place, you know the all this is very important in studying the human behavior, human personality, why crime takes place, how to instill values in our youngsters, in coming to all kinds of research based on ethics, all this has become very important it is an essential part of mind sciences today. The science of cognition how does it begin how does thought begin in your mind when does the sankalp begin you know if if actually you ask a criminal why he did what he did he will say I was not at all in charge of myself at that time but it has begun in his mind and he is being blamed for it how did it begin this you can know only through these methods like these so then if you know the effect you will know where to make the causal changes you understand where should the causal change be made tell me the criminal to lock up the criminal is that what it should be done why his mind became like that mind may kya hua why the sankalp became like that so this pre conceptual movements if they this is what mind training and yoga is about you know you learn to will rightly you learn to think rightly you learn to direct your emotions to a particular level. So, that they they are useful to you, they do not degrade you, this is the great usage of the science. So, you understood the fifth point, how it helps you understand the underpinnings of voluntary acts. And so, you can clearly see the enormous contribution first person research has has to give to anything. If you do not know how you are functioning there is no point in knowing how the world is functioning you know. Kal hi mene aapko ye cheez boli thi na. You are you will take a very superficial view of how to make changes in the world. If you know how you are functioning you will know everything about how the world is functioning. Jo ye research research karte hai na, they actually bring out knowledge from within because the two are not different, I am telling you. If you penetrate into the subject, you will get all knowledge of the objective world. In a strange way, people who are yogis, yogi type, actually they work only on removing everything from their mind and all knowledge comes is get unfolded by that it's not about stuffing knowledge in your brain so if you catch this point apko pata chalega kaise aapki padhai improve ho bhi ho sakti hai, it's not just about stuffing things from outside first clarity is to be achieved in your mind make it clear make it stable make it very balanced remove the unnecessary elements create the right atmosphere within and you will be able to retain everything the knowledge comes out from within you focus on something it becomes part of your mind you know Vivekananda life me a sub hair we'll just pages they take the and the entire information used to get soaked into his mind so this is a possibility now this is one of the very important uses of first-person research yoga and Vedanta another very important area where it can throw a lot of light is you must have heard about the hard problem in consciousness studies Do you know about consciousness studies? See I told you initially that any science you go deep into you will come to the problem of consciousness even if it is a purely objective science you will understand that the consciousness element in the human being, it comes into every situation and it has to at some point be analyzed, understood, studied. So in what is consciousness studies is actually studying consciousness, but I told you many times in western science consciousness means awareness invested in the thought process, invested in the emotion, invested in the memory, this is how they are studying it, but in consciousness studies they have come across this very very important problem. See it like this, subjective experience how does it take place conscious experience simple conscious experience how does it take place it's a big puzzle to modern science so the whole a whole branch consciousness studies is studying it how do I experience you see a now this video camera also is tracking images it doesn't feel any image you and I are feeling everything isn't it you feel the beauty of a flower you feel the apparatus around you the feel of an experience it comes due to consciousness but how do you explain it if you could find neurophysiological correlates if you could track the neurochemistry of it it would be an easy problem you have an explanation to give if you cannot do that then it's the hard problem of consciousness studies this is the problem how do you explain conscious experience tell me how do you experience joy tell me do you experience it as endorphin or serotonin or is it a lightness a bubbliness in your mind happiness in your heart how do you experience joy as a feeling you don't experience it as a neurochemical unless we tell you it is your serotonin this is your happy chemical you don't even know it so experiences in the first person consciousness is responsible for that experience how will you know that aapko samajh mein aara hai main kya bolne ke koshish kariyon how do you experience pain tell me do you experience it as cortisol then as agony again it's a first-person experience so if first-person research nahi hoga toh kaise aapko pata chalega asal cheez kya hai so this is what they are trying hard problem means this please see this how does a conscious experience happen this world of matter and energy how do I feel it as how do I see it as I'm seeing it the feel of an experience how does it happen yeh bahut badi cheez hai na aap soch ke dekho they are going to the heart of the matter actually how does a con how will you explain a conscious experience if you don't have neuro physiological or neurochemical correlates and you don't have many times how will you explain the situation, how will you explain a conscious experience. So to under you know who coined this term David Chalmers he has coined this term hard problem of consciousness studies of New York University. So the this problem of this hard problem we will go into it in a novel way this can be explained actually only using first person research methodology because who is the experiencer you are the experiencer you can give the best knowledge of what you are experiencing is not it. Now, we are going to analyze this experience in in yoga vedanta you see how they are trying to do it is they are throwing a lot of light on this problem because they will immediately ask you what is more fundamental to your experience is it your body or your consciousness tell me how do you experience your body or mind or thought is it in your awareness or outside your awareness. It is in your awareness. It is in your awareness not outside your awareness you can never experience it outside your awareness anything is experienced in your awareness is not it. So, then the primary thing is what your awareness is fundamental even to the thought process the meaning is that. So, the research starts right from there because of the fact that all experiences in the first your awareness is fundamental even to the thought process the meaning is that. So the research starts right from there because of the fact that all experiences in the first person they have gone straight into the first person this is the kind of research they have adopted and by doing this actually you know many thinkers have said have recognized the validity of this kind of a research. You know Eddington he once said that mind is the first and most direct thing in your experience and all else is only remote inference. Is not this true? Mind is the first and most direct thing in your experience all else is remote inference. So, you see that is why the this form of research goes like this. Now before I proceed let me just show you a few images here to drive home all that we have been discussing. You see tracking the neurophysiology and neurochemistry of an experience is easy problem of consciousness. Now suppose you are seeing suppose this figure shows he is seeing a cat, what exactly is happening in your brain, the neural causes and correlates and neural representation of a cat is being produced there, a study of this, all of this is what is called the easy problem of consciousness studies. Actually how do you perceive an object, do you know? You have studied it many times. What happens? Light is thrown out by objects that enters your eye, goes through your retina, goes to the visual cortex in your brain and there what happens? It falls as an image, but then how do you feel the reality of that object? this is where consciousness comes in which science does not explain you understand dekhe yeh same cheez is video camera ke saath bhi ho rahi hai it is not feeling any object you are feeling the reality of an object you as I told you you see the beauty of the blue sky you see the beauty of a rose you are able to understand things in proportion to each other you are able to understand things in proportion to each other you are able to have a varied experiences in life through your senses you experience each thing the feel of something comes when your consciousness gets attached to simple neural data which is falling on your brain isn't it when your consciousness gets attached to it. So, this study, this is how perception takes place, the very fact of perception itself means consciousness is in some way involved. But here we are coming only to this much, you see if you are able to find the easy problem, the easy problem is quite easy, you find the neural correlates and what all is getting secreted as a result and you give an explanation. So, this is how you are perceiving this particular object. Now, the hard problem when you come to that you are tracking the nature of conscious experience. So, exactly how does conscious experience happen what produces the feel of an experience and without an objective correlate can the experience be explained without an objective correlate did you see the intensity of these questions see these questions are very Vedantic in outlook what is it that is responsible for experience? This very same question you will find in the Upanishads. By what do you does the mind experience? You see similar question, they are putting a similar question. The research there is in understanding how the subject has contributed to the experience. You understand? And the research here is how can I find the neurochemistry of it. We are combining the two methods in neurophenomenology. Is not it? You are combining the two methods. Now if you have understood the heart problem, let me proceed to one fact here. isif if we are able to combine both these methods Vedanta and science. Science as much as it can give us and Vedanta whatever it has to say about first person research you we will it will be a very productive study because both of them are studying at two completely different levels. This is studying the objective front that is the subjective front. If you can combine these two effectively we will get a kind of supreme knowledge, but for that to happen it is not enough just to combine third person EEG data and a meditatorsview it is not enough to just do that. It is important to take it up as a personal research. It must you must understand thing learn to understand things from within, bring a stability to your mind, culture your awareness this may appear little strange to you what culturing awareness means which means what if you at least for some time remove thoughts from your mind you will see your the level of awareness in your mind goes up. You are more aware than identified with objects and thoughts and emotions and all this hm this is what I mean by culturing awareness. So, if you adopt these techniques you will see you get a inside view of all these problems hm and you will you also will be able to contribute to this research in a very deep way. Other if you are not able to do this you know a confused kind of understanding of all this remains in your mind. So, some involvement on your part is required for this and if you are able to culture awareness in your mind which means what not just identifying with mind activity but standing apart and seeing it if you are able to do this you see this is what will happen to you in any activity high self-awareness self awareness means this not just the investment of your awareness in the thought process but its ability to stand apart you see a simulation shows that it affects decision- making coordination and conflict management in your practical life this is how it will help you. You see their decision quality increased so much 68 percent if there is more awareness than identification in the mind, if there is more self-awareness. Look at the coordination which was 27 by it goes by 73 percent high self-awareness teams conflict management you see how they have been able to handle it 65 percent. So, you see low self-awareness teams are not able to do this they have studied this scientifically you did you get the point ah a certain amount of meditation every day if you are able to distance yourself from your thought process from your emotional whatever fantasies you will see that you are able to control situations better you are able to take better decisions ah the more the awareness the more you are in charge of your life and your personality the better it will be your work and the lesser the awareness the more the confusion in the mind even conceptualization thinking process will not be clear tab lagta hai yeh sab Vedanta high high philosophy hai kuch practical nahi hai aisa sab lagta hai theory hai if your thought process is very clear, you will see it is an obvious fact, they are just analyzing your everyday experience in a very deep way. If there is, if the mind is confused, you know simple knowledge also appears something too much and if the mind is clear enormous knowledge will just come into your mind by itself it gets unfolded from within so the mind is the essential thing awareness increasing awareness in your mind actually yoga this is what it is about increasing the level of awareness in your mind not just the level of identification with thought emotion all this ah. If you can increase awareness you will the success rate in anything will be very high. So, this is of great practical use to you. Now we will discuss this particular process of standard what is called first person research methodology what did I tell you that yoga and Vedanta gives you very good standard methods that the most common method which is given towards self knowledge self-awareness is this shravan manan and nididhyasana. Aapne suna hoga yeh you have to hear Vedanta properly, after that you have to think about it repeatedly and you have to apply some kind of a nididhyasana which means a kind of meditation technique and become meditative and you will get this knowledge. Now yeh exactly kya ho raya I would like to show you in the form of slides, because you cannot miss certain vital points. If I just explain it to you, I am afraid that the impact may not fall on your mind. I can just explain the thing to you, what it is, the process of self-knowledge, but if you see it also, I think it has a better impact. Now you see the the first thing I told you is Shravan these are standard Vedantic techniques used to go into first-person research. See we already determined first-person research the most authentic techniques are found in yoga and Vedanta isn't it? The standard method given towards this is Shravan, Manan and Nididhyasan. Shravan is what? It is hearing Vedantic text. Dekhiye ab tak aapne shayad aatma shabd bhi nahi suna hoga. Ab is course me aake aap thoda thoda sun rahe ho. Some idea is coming into your mind what I who I am what my actual being means what is the subject some kind of a dharana is coming into your mind now this is what shravan does for you it creates the right vrittis in your mind I'm sorry I'm explaining a vedantic term through yoga psychology but well usually we don't do this but because you're familiar with yoga psychology now I'm using this shravan means creating the right vrittis in your mind manan means repetition of those vrittis application of mind actually to create the right sanskar backup you will require to dive within and nididhyasana is actually you can say it is making the mental mode confirm to reality making the mental mode such that it is able to intuit reality Nididhyasana technique means this is a meditation it's an upasana technique technique I shouldn't say Nididhyasana actually means meditation now how do we go into this you see actually what is happening in your mind is what this slide is showing you. You are turning the rays of your attention inward. Usually what is the kind of attention you have? It is mainly outward turned. We are studying outside objects. Here what are they trying to tell you? They are telling you focus a little on the subject, on the self because first person research involves this, you need to know something about the subject. Now for this attention has to be turned inward. Ab dekhi hai the difference between the two I am I have put on that slide. The difference actually lies in the lens of your mind are you seeing that whether you are going to converge the rays or diverge the rays of your attention depends on the structure of your mind how is your mind trained usually of the rays are always very divergent now the structure of your mind should change if they are to converge within structure of your mind should change वो अपने बारे में पराजा रहा है। आपका प्रतिया पर प्रतिया का क्या मतलब है? आप अपने प्रतिया का क्या मतलब है? आप पर प्रतिया का क्या मतलब है? आपका प्रतिया का क्या मतलब है? प्रतिया का प्रतिया, प्रतिया का प्रतिया, प्रतिया का प्रतिया, प्रतिया का प्रतिया, प्रतिया का प्रतिया, प्रतिया का प्रतिया, प्रतिया का प्रतिया, प्रतिया का प्रतिया, प्रतिया का प्रतिया, प्रतिया का प्रतिया, प्रतिया का प्रतिया, प्रतिया का प्रतिया, प्रतिया का प्रतिया, प्रतिया का प्रतिया, प्रतिया ability to turn my attention inward you know in Upanishad there is a beautiful mantra Kato Upanishad Paranchikhani Vyatranat Svayambhu Tasmat Paran Pasyati Nantaratman Kaschid Dheera Pratyagatmanam Aikshat Avrttachakshu Amritatvam Ikshan it means our senses are turned outward mind is also turned outward usually and so we are we take joy only in outward objects but some dhira understanding the nature of experience kashidhira pratyagatmanam aikshat he turned the gaze of the mind and the senses inward this turning inward ability to do this will come only with practice isile to thoda thoda meditation suggest kar rahe hai turning the rays of your attention inward if you practice enough you will see you will be in charge of your mind in a way whenever you want you can have focus it is not dissipated. If the focus is constantly dissipated, distracted, you will become restless in no time. And well it harms you in a very big way, in your studies, in everything, you require more effort in everything to achieve success. If the mind is under control and trained, your attention is trained, the content of your mind, you see the structure of your mind has changed due to practice due to good habits due to a disciplined life everything becomes easy achievement becomes easy in any field so turning the rays of mind attention inward now what are we trying to focus it on we are trying to focus it on the knowledge of the self so you see who am I this is something you must catch here what exactly you are meaning by I is the light of pure consciousness reflected in the mind which pervades in your buddhi it generates empirical awareness our sense of being this is technically called the jiva the entity that designates itself as I. What do you mean by I? What is the picture that comes in your mind when you say I tell me to understand the significance of this what we are giving you here tell me first what is the picture that this what we are giving you here, tell me first what is your the picture that comes in your mind when you say I? kya aata hai mann mein? Body and name. Body and name, very good. Your name and form comes in your mind, that is all. How will you know who is the real I in you? Name and form always changing, is not it? What is the unchanging thing in you? What is the permanent thing in you name and form always changing isn't it what is the unchanging thing in you what is the permanent thing in you up a cell make a you are that how will you actually find it you see you are more mind than body isn't it mentally you are more you're more awareness than mind if you actually stop thoughts this will become very obvious to you that you are more awareness than mind. There is a fatal error in causative ergo sum, I think therefore I am, is this true? Think and tell me, are you there only when you think and tell me are you there only when you think or because you are there you are able to think if you have yoga you will immediately understand even if I stop thought I am there not that I am there because I think because I am therefore I think difference is very simple you see cogito ergo sum means I think therefore I am yes that is one way of looking at it if you do not think are you there or not tell me that when you are not thinking if this is see cogito ergo sum means so means I think therefore I am this will immediately corollary of this would be then if I do not think I am not is this true I'm saying this is not true which means what the essential thing is your existence because you're existing you're thinking now what is existing you as awareness are always there thoughts move in and out of that awareness only if you stop thought for a few microseconds at least you will understand this immediately that awareness is more fundamental to the thought process if you don't think you don't vanish if I don't think I remain over thoughts come move in and out of my awareness not that only if I'm thinking I'm there and if I don't think I'm not there, so a little amount of yoga meditation is required to under, stop your mind for a few seconds and you'll understand this, if you don't stop mind you will not understand this, samajh mein aara hai, see that's why I told you know Freud all these people Jung if they had really met a Buddha or Vivekananda their whole theories would have been different. People who have worked at transcending mind you just meet them and your whole paradigm shift in your thinking because these things become obvious when you stop mind you have the capacity to stop your mind and then you will understand awareness is primary to mind function that is why you in a sense you should be saying I am so I think not I think therefore I am. Yes. Converging inward is introversion. If the rays of your attention are converging to an inner source, your mind is turning within. If the rays of attention are dissipated towards an outer source, you are losing your attention. You understand? Why I say you are losing your attention is slowly you will see the object will take charge of those rays of attention. You will lose control over the situation. You got the point? Now, here you see the level of research here in this diagram if you have understood what I said so far you will understand the light of pure consciousness reflected in the mind is your sense of being you feel alive you feel aware it is due to this light of consciousness reflecting in your mind this is what you call I technically it's called the Jeeva in Vedanta our sense of I arises from here the I sense now what Vedanta is telling you is if this I sense is kept very pure without attaching it to many things it will lead to its source it's called pure aham pratyaya youapne Raman maharishi ka naam suna hoga this is the kind of technique he adopted the pure aham will lead to its source to generate the pure aham is a task unless you have those sanskars which means what our aham is invested in so many things may ye hu, wo hu, wo hu, wo all that the world imposes on you, you go on identifying with that track and see what you mean by I just now it is constantly changing but you're identifying bit by bit with everything the world expects you to be that is why self-knowledge is difficult if you can keep that eye pure that sense isiliya yeh de rahe hain aapko you understand try to understand the real you is not invested in anything this is most obvious yeh aap pakad sakte ho with a little thought so you must always learn to understand the relative importance of things when you are even if the picture of your body appears in your mind as I, you must know that you are seeing a picture an objective view of something you are identified with at present nothing more than that, that is not the real you. Even the mind your thought is not the real you, that which is behind thought, the awareness that is more you than anything else. Lekin ye cheez jo hai ye pakad nahi chahiye, sirf sunna nahi, abhi aapne sun liya, dwell on it and you will catch it. It's your own experience, this is not a philosophy we are giving you. All the time you are awareness only into which thoughts are coming and going you give those thoughts so much importance then you superimpose them on objects like body and you identify with it and you create all the confusion the I always remains detached you are always that that so much Shweta Ketu how many times it is said in Chandogya Upanishad you are always that that so much is with the kid who how many times it is said in Chandogya Upanishad you are always that just analyze your experience your existence just now you will come to this so if you have understood this you will understand this next question you see this comes in Shankara's commentary on Brihadaranyaka Upanishad he says as fire does not burn itself so the self does not know itself and the knower can have no knowledge of a thing that is not its object therefore through what instrument should one know the knower because of which this universe is known and who else should know it hmm how will you know the knower? This is the question he is putting. You usually know something if it is an object of perception. How are you going to know the knower? Now this is what we will be studying in the next two slides. So I have put this question here. See he asked the question and then proceeds Shankaracharya. The answer very beautiful answer which Raman Marshi gives you is in order to realize this truth we need to eliminate the thinking mind to dissolve it in the universal self why is he saying this I told you awareness is behind thought it is because of the presence of awareness that thought is getting enlivened so you cannot know it just through the medium of thought isn't it can you know awareness just through your mind through the medium of thought tell me why it is behind the mind if it was in front of the mind you could know it as I had what is in front of me I'm able to see it what is behind me I can't see it this is what is happening in your mind, your mind itself is functioning due to awareness so it can't reveal awareness, we have to adopt some technique to do it, what is the technique adopted? Vivekananda actually gives you a number of techniques if you read his works, here I have just boiled it down to a few from yoga and Vedanta, how to know the knower, the preparatory is shutting out the modifications of your mind why should you do this otherwise your awareness will keep getting invested in the thought process hmm... Isiliye this is a technique in yoga first of all shutting down the modification of your mind iska matlab kya hai too much of thinking too many vrittis you must stop that meditation mein pehle aap yahi karte ho na what do you do as soon as you sit in meditation you try to stop your thoughts so this is the first thing the second thing is working to intensify what is called the reflected awareness in your mind you are that awareness through which you are thinking. If you remove thought the awareness should get intensified. Your sense of being will be very intense. If you have practiced some real amount of yoga, so this is a way of culturing awareness. Practically it means intensifying awareness in the mind and for this meditation upasana techniques are used. So this is all preparatory. Actually how you can know the knower is Vedanta will tell you even all these are preparatory steps. You can go directly to the source if you only clean that lens. The lens of your mind if that is very clean, your very aham pratyai jo eye sense hai that itself becomes like a mirror it will lead to the source it you see generating the pure aham pratyai will reflect the pure self the lens of your mind becomes a mirror this is how by enquiry into the eye you can know the self you will understand the glory of this only if you understand if at the present moment you encounter the inability to do this. Why is it when I ask I who am I the answer does not come immediately to me. See when Raman Marshi or Vivekananda ask who am I? they are in that state immediately we are we don't have that pure aham pratyay it is already invested in many things so the mind is not becoming a mirror when I ask I, the I is already identified I am so and so such and such and such and such all these are my characteristics this is my Vedanta kya aapko karta hai na it gives you it introduces you to your real nature introduces you to yourself you can say aapko aapka hi parichay de raha hai the real you is this pure aham pratyay, if you distance yourself from them a little you will be able to trace yourself back to your source, so ek bar agar iska glimpse mil jaye you can handle this equipment very well, you will live safely in this world you don't have to worry so much about what your mind is doing you understand easily this self-knowledge is so very important you see it is tracking the real you even if it had no practical use this knowledge please see it has enormous practical use usage but even if it didn't have just to know yourself isn't it important just to know who you truly are you know everything in the world but you don't know yourself the essential thing you have discounted so understand this is a very deep level knowledge and you can know the knower by doing this what happens is you see this is again from the Chandogya Upanishad yo vayi bhuma tat sukham na alpe sukham asti bhumayiva sukham that is why you should know it what they are trying to tell you is the infinite consciousness that you are that is the source of your happiness if you just reach that stage you will understand where exactly happiness comes from what is happiness bliss you will understand that as long as you are working only with the mind identified only with the mind you are only getting very not even filtered you should you should I should say third order derivative of bliss and that is why you are constantly searching for bliss in outer objects thoda ye gnan a jaye humare jeevan mein, you will understand happiness is a state of mind and the source of happiness is even behind the mind. We are studying happiness isn't it? From where it is coming it will become very clear to you. So, you will be able to function independent of objects, independent of all the things that the world throws at you otherwise you are carried away by them you get involved in them in such a way you are not able to extricate yourself. The all of our problems are mainly due to this because there is absolutely no knowledge of the subject. To ye cheez yaha let us clear what is it exactly that they are trying to say. Now I will make 2, 3 points and we will take up questions on this. See where we are erring in our understanding of this is our our whole mistake is to take consciousness as an adjective to the ego I am conscious only if I am conscious of something we don't study consciousness in itself we have not thought about it even if I'm conscious of something well just say if I'm conscious of something well, jaise abhi aapne kaha, if I'm conscious of something well then only the word consciousness comes into my mind This is the primary mistake If you are not conscious of something, if something has not yet become a thought in your mind, still your awareness remains over, please see this Your awareness is fundamental to mind function before you become conscious of something you are always still full of consciousness your awareness itself this is one fundamental mistake which we make due to which we are not able to get this knowledge another thing is the fatal error to think that well only if I think I am if I remove thought from my mind I don't know what will happen agar thoda sa yog aapne practice kiya ho the way we are training you not just shutting out thoughts from your mind actually concentrating at the heart center with a certain amount of focus if you have practiced in that way you will see awareness remains where you will yearn for that state of removing thoughts from your mind and remaining over as that awareness ab jitna karoge utna aapko pata chalega the truth about all this and the third point which I would like to make here is what you are calling I that the word you most often use may may may that is nothing but a reflection a shadow of that consciousness which you are truly you are attached to that shadow it's a representation of who you truly are representation in this world and you see this this I actually comes into operation I as the ego comes into operation only when it comes in contact with objects. Isiliya aap objects ko zyada zyada zyada chahate ho. Objects should you start accumulating holding objects because your I is invested in them. You feel it is increase increase of objects is increase of I. The fundamental mistake is where I have identified my sense of being with my ego. Ego is nothing but a shadow of who you truly are. So, thoda ye atma jnan aapme aajaye, the ego will learn to be what it is. It's a shadow, it will remain as a shadow. It's a functional entity in this empirical world, in this transactional world, but your own real identity is always something far deeper than this far deeper far more majestic far truer it is this real you which is giving you everything that you seek in life. A deep balance a kind of inner dignity will come into your life and most of all problems will go out of your life, you will be able to focus life energy on the things that really matter not on unnecessary problems, emotional problems, this and that, wrong decisions not on all this rubbish which is the creation of a untrained mind. This is how self-knowledge takes you to a very deep level of your personality changing you from within and a well developed being in this way interacts wonderfully with the world any situation you can handle any person you can handle so any problem you can handle so self-knowledge it is so very important in building life. Now today's research methodology we have covered two forms of research, third person and first person perspective. Do you have any doubts on all this the glory of self knowledge have you been able to capture at least through all these explanations important cheese hey hey how many given kayak on a chain yeah I'll close a much me are I or is it just a think of academic study now course will end after another two talks will your study of this end do you feel this is important or not tell me it is vital to your proper functioning in life someday maybe after many many years you will understand the importance of all this which is being given to you now because this is a knowledge which does not change if it was knowledge to do with your mind it will keep changing this is the knowledge of the real you the real you does not change this is the actual truth about you this knowledge does not change, this is the actual truth about you, this knowledge does not change so this knowledge will always be of help to you, it changes the reference of your eye from the false eye to the true eye so then you remain intact no matter what experiences come in your life, you will live it far better at a deeper level more mature level than if you don't have this knowledge yes I will not say the only technique is meditation meditation is required because our mind is so scattered there are people who have penetrated into this part just through logic they crash into reality just by knowing it is possible but this is the standard technique of meditation given for minds like ours and there are very fixed meditation techniques which if you want in the next class I will give you some meditation techniques in yoga and Vedanta we can discuss I totally understand how it is made, but how to practice it? Yes, yes, very good. Practical question she has asked. Exactly what do I do when I sit? How do I control my mind? So, it's a very structured techniques have been given. I can give you the techniques like this. I can explain it to you. You have to do it. You have to do it. There are different types of techniques. Objective meditations are there, subjective meditations are there, expansion of awareness meditations are there, ahamgraha upasana techniques are there. Ahamgraha upasana means actually tracking the eye. How do you know the real eye? So many methods are there. Upasana techniques, vidyas and of course in yoga enormous techniques are there so we will discuss a few in the next few classes remember this see this last slide which I showed you yo vayi bhuma tat sukham na alpe sukham asti this has a very significant message to give you if you are your mind has expanded to a certain extent you will understand what joy means if the mind itself has not expanded it is busy with circular thinking small type of thinking you will lose joy in life. That is why actually because intuitively you understand this you run to places where your mind expands. You go to the Himalayas, you go to ocean fronts and all this because of this reason. So how can you keep this mind expansion technique by yourself without having to go here and there? mind expansion technique by yourself without having to go here and there how you can do it is on an everyday basis dwell on great things in life on everyday basis sirf TV pe man na rakhe sirf mobile pe man na rakhe great thoughts the lives of great people great ideas and meditation on objects which are wide like oceans, see I put all these images here, a sunrise, a sunset, meditating on the Himalayas or a deity whom you love, Om, a symbol, a holy symbol, if you dwell on these images you will see a certain calmness naturally comes into your mind a certain control naturally comes into your mind. So this has impact on your mind and this is one of the techniques used in meditation deliberately should dwell on this because the nature of the mind is if it is in an expanded state it will be happy if it is in a contracted state it will become like a tornado you know too much energy very small space it will create problems for you so keep it expanded like that always connect with great things in life and you will become great yes yes conceptual moment in mind that's a vital point see we discussed this pre-conceptual moment in the mind when we were discussing the neural underpinnings of voluntary acts volition how does it take place before you actually will something what is happening in your mind is it has been found you see mind is not something you can see isn't it brain is something you can see what is the difference between brain and mind is the software the two are very connected, your hardware is working due to the software please see this and what he is asking is what is exactly happening in the mind I told you there is a pre-conceptual movement before something becomes a thought before something becomes your will that pre-conceptual moment kya cheez hai it is actually a vritti a modification of your mind before a complete thought is formed your mind gets modified you know your mind is modified by two things the exposures from outside the memories from within when you are making a sankalp it is based on some prior experience isn't it so before it becomes a complete sankalp the mind will keep changing like this undergoing a certain moment this moment of the mind has been neurologically tracked and identified in the brain through neural signal analysis and even meditators report this that yes before I think a complete thought and convert it into a will my will my sankalp before that my mind has started wobbling. To yaha se shuru hota hai conceptualization. Now if I don't know this you know we start from behavior not even from conceptualization we start from behavior why the person's behavior is like this. Arrey starting point hua hai mind aisa aisa kaam kiya hai. The mind has undergone all these changes and that is why that is the result. So without this mind science, this level of study, you will not be able to change behavior. You will only make what is called symptomatic cures, not deep level causes, you will not be able to unearth even. So first person research methodology is so important. See very good question he has asked. Different people, different philosophers have given different philosophies and people have given different techniques, different methods. पर प्रश्चादागागागा प्रश्चादागागा प्रश्चादागागा प्रश्चादागागा प्रश्चादागागा प्रश्चादागागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्रश्चादागा प्र it is Poornavad in Vedanta. It is shoonya vad from the standpoint of what, tell me? From the standpoint of thoughts. You are removing thoughts from your mind. It is Poornavad from the standpoint of awareness. Awareness remains over many years. To ye terminology they are using as Poornavad, Vedantis, and they are using as shoonya vad. State ek hi hai. Samajh mein aara hai aapko? So this is actually a saying only that every philosopher will differ from the other philosophers in terminologies but the state of experience will be the same almost the same you can say especially all these subjective techniques after all everyone is researching into the same subject isn't it achha ye mujhe bata ye subjects alag hai kya are there different subjects is consciousness in the plural or in the singular singular always there are not many mere andar ek awareness aapke andar ek awareness unke andar ek aisa nahi hai consciousness is one it is not limited by your body and mind. The same consciousness is functioning through different bodies and minds. Since we are identified with body and mind I am I and you are you, it appears like that. You are identified with your name and form only but the reality about you is consciousness that is the same in all so we are more united than different that is why you see immediately you relate to Vedanta. I have seen this in many places you know that you give mind management maybe 50% will relate to it, you give just techniques of how to have positive emotions and all that maybe just 25% you give Vedanta, hardcore Vedanta immediately they relate. Even very young people relate immediately because in some intuitive way we know we are not just body and mind we are functioning through it. So what is most obvious is what is being structurally studied in a proper organized way. That is why I told you Vedanta is not a philosophy which is very difficult for yogis and rishis. It is an analysis of your existential experience just now. Right now you are that. You have not seen it closely that's all time is up yes no no that is attention has to be brought to a certain point. I am talking of awareness. You understand? Mind, mind or awareness ka expansion hona chahiye. Attention has to be brought. What is attention and awareness? Tell me the difference. Ye humne discuss kiya tha. Awareness is one of the undercurrents of attention, awareness directed by your will is what is called attention, agar aap attention fix karo ek point pe, the underlying awareness will expand, if your attention itself is dissipated it is not fixed there is no chance for that awareness to expand so much matter if you go deep into your mind you will understand all this what I'm talking about it a connection in some sub cheese omic connection today you hear and keep one day you will see that this is the an actual fact that is why you are asked to direct attention to one point but expand mind and awareness.
 Thank you. Om Asato Maa Sadgamaya Tamaso Maa Jyotir Gamaya Mrityor Maa Amritam Gamaya Om Shanti Shanti Shanti He So welcome back to the classes after a short break have you been doing your meditations and some effect you feel on the mind its working better yes today we are going to discuss some very important concepts so I want you to pay attention first of all as usual I will start with the Upanishads after that we are going to study the structure of scientific revolutions and we are going to study deep level yoga. So the story which I would like to tell you today is from the Kathopanishad. It's a story of Nachiketa. आपने नाम सुनाये न? नाची केता वो एक वाजश्रवस पर रिशी पर देखा था यह एक वाजश्रवस पर देखा था यह एक वाजश्रवस पर देखा था यह एक वाजश्रवस पर देखा था यह एक वाजश्रवस पर देखा था यह एक वाजश्रवस पर देखा था यह एक वाजश्रवस पर देखा था यह एक वाजश्रवस पर देखा था यह एक वाजश्रवस पर देखा था यह एक वाजश्रवस पर देखा था यह एक वाजश्रवस पर देखा था as you will see. What exactly the story is like? Its a story which teaches you so much about how to enter self knowledge, how to get self knowledge and so many ideas are given to you So the story about Nachiketa has a lot to teach us. So carefully just follow it. Nachiketa's father Vajashravas Rishi, he was conducting a sacrifice and as part of that yajna, dakshina dete hai na, they give gifts to brahmins and all that so he saw that his father was giving out cows and very old cows, cows which were not capable of yielding milk this kind of cattle he was giving out. So Nachiketa suddenly thought that in a sacrifice the best things are to be given out isn't it? Because it's an offering to God and how is it that he is giving out such things so it is actually described as Shraddha Aavivesha which means Shraddha entered this boy the sincerity, the seriousness in this young lad look at this, he immediately goes and asks his father the question that is put there is to whom will you give me in that case you are giving out such gifts and then the father gets angry and he says I will give you to Lord Yama and then the story say goes that he goes to the abode of Yama and then there's this very beautiful conversation between him and Yama which is the Kathopanishad sometime when you get time you know later on in life also you can read Kathopanishad it's something very powerful with a number of illuminating ideas. So what happens is a kind of confidence comes into this boy due to the clarity of his vision. You see first of all immediately he understands that the what his father is doing in the sacrifice is not the right thing to do due to that he has gone and questioned you know how confidence is born what gave this son the confidence to challenge his father in a right confidence is born when you have a clarity of vision when you have a deep sense of right and wrong then naturally confidence will come into your personality so this made him challenge his father and then whatever his father said immediately he has been able to go and actually ask, asking Yama means what trying to get the highest truths of life this has been put in a story format and when the conversation started actually when he goes to the abode of Yama for three days it seems Yama is not there so this boy patiently waits outside Yama is on one of his rounds may be collecting souls and he stays outside without food and drink and he does not turn back he waits waits, persistence, perseverance and then when Yama comes he tells him that I have made a Brahmin wait for three days and three nights without food so this is not good for me so ask three boons from me whatever you want to ask, the first boon which Nachiketa asks is well make my father peaceful make him happy make him do the right things and when I return back make him accept me. See the very first boon is for the father. The second boon which he asks is regarding a sacrifice, it's called Nachiketa sacrifice, it's actually a Vidya, a kind of Upasana technique but we won't go into that now. But the third boon is what is very interesting, most important to us. The third boon is what is very interesting most important to us the third boon which he asks is tell me about death so that I will understand life he says which means I want to know what survives man when the body falls what is it that is carried forward some say that he exists, some say he no longer exists after his death tell me the truth about this now as soon as Yama hears this he starts telling him well son you ask for something else because this is a very subtle truth which even the gods are confused about. They dont know you know this Indra, Varuna all these deities gods that is the lesser gods they do not know this truth so there is a lot of confusion about it so ask for something else and then he offers him very many things each one of which Nachiketa discards Shatayusha Putra Pautran Vrineshwa Bahun Pashun Hasti Hiranyam Ashwan Bhumer Mahadayatanam Vrineshwa Swayamcha Jeeva Sharado Yavadichyasi All these are the boons which means ask to live for a hundred years ask for anything of this earth for children and grandchildren and gold and wealth and the best of life and as long as you wish to live but for everything Nachiketa says that you know the conclusion he comes to he says Sarvendriyanam jarayanti teja what do all these pleasures do for me you see this is the thing which we should observe here Sarvendriyanam jarayanti teja it removes the vitality of my senses it removes my energy actually too much indulgence you see what it does to you so he comes to this conclusion that after all this is doing this to me. So I don't want all of this please give me the answer to this question which I have asked. And then Yama is very surprised seeing the persistence of this boy. And then he embarks on this very beautiful it's a sort of monologue in which he goes on giving the teaching on self knowledge which is very interesting. I will give you some portion of it here. That's all we can do. So, the first thing is, which one of the first ideas he gives him, I've only chosen those ideas which will be useful to you as students. You see, Shreyas and Prayas ki jo idea hai, Shreyas and Prayas, aapne suna hoga Hindi mein ye shabd hai, he gives him that idea, straight from the Upanishads, Shreyas cha prayas cha manushya me ta, tau sampareetya vivinakti dheera, shreyo hi dheero bhi prayas ho vrinite, prayo mando yogakshe madh vrinite, which means to say, you see you have asked for a kind of discrimination between what is Shreyasar and what is Prayaskar. Shreya hum kise kehte hai? What do we call Shreya? That which is good, that which is preferable. Praya is that which is not so good, just pleasant may be and that which is pleasurable. So between the preferable and the pleasurable, the preferable is to be chosen. This is the teaching. He says that the one, a man of discrimination will make sure that he seeks out Shreyas and the man who just wants to satisfy his immediate gratification will go in for Shreyas. So they carry a important idea especially in decision making in all these things if you are not able to distinguish between the good and the pleasant, you will conclude the pleasant is good isn't it? Usually it is not. See this for yourself. These two, this is a very defining idea of the Indian culture everything that is pleasant is not everything that is good always the two are different, good is different from pleasure goodness is different from pleasure and shreyas is different from prayers so if you cant even demarcate between the two how are you going to make a decision so this is a very important idea given in this Upanishad. You can read more about it I told you if you go to the source material and the commentaries on it in Kathopanishad itself. And then he says that since you have chosen Shreyas I will give you the knowledge of the self. I will tell you about the self but this knowledge it is very rare which means many people don't get to hear of it also isn't it? do you hear about the Atman or Atma tattva kya cheez hai? Iske bare mein hum aaj kal sunte hai kya? It is not even available for hearing especially from your educational apparatus. So this is what exactly what he is saying you do not even get to hear of it and those who get to hear of it also will not understand it will not know about it. How is it to be known aschar yo vakta kushalosya labdha which means from a very qualified teacher it is to be heard and then one even the student should be of that type because you know actually spiritual teaching it's a matter of transmission it's a matter of giving one mind transmits to another mind it's not just telling something it's not even about talking about lectures so the thing is to tune in to a mind of that order and then this knowledge can be transmitted so he finds in Nachiketa such a pupil actually one who is able to do that so you see Nachiketa is a very good model for youth asking for the higher truths of life by oneself through one's own discrimination so this is what he embodies and then he starts telling him that there are you see actual methodologies in the Kathopanishad to reach the truth of the self one of which is Sarve Veda Yath Padam Avananti Tapansi Sarvani Chaiyadvadanti Yadichanto Brahmacharyam Charanti Tattepadam Sangrahena Brahimi Om Iti Etat he says how to meditate on this Om that which everyone is seeking all austere people seek that which the Vedas are expounding that seeking which people practice brahmacharya and all these disciplines I will tell you very briefly that is Om and then he teaches him the meditation on Om may I could get a glimpse there you up is open a ship make ya hey or up case a dive Karsatil do you know what actually Om is? Om is your real name. If you go on with the chanting of this type, you will see your mind naturally turns within. It leads you to your real self. So istharake meditation techniques, hints towards them have been given in this Upanishad. And then he also tells you what will not get you this knowledge naaya matma pravachane na labhyo na medhaya na bahuna shruthe na yame vaisavrunute tena labhyo tasse shyaatma vivrunute tanum svam the meaning of this is you will not get this knowledge just by a pravachan you will not get it by hearing of it too much na medhaya not even by a, by just, it's not just intellectual knowledge. Ya me vaishavrunute tena labhya, this has very deep meaning. It means, the literal translation is, him whom the Atman chooses, to him he will reveal himself. Iska matlab hai, dekhe, actually if you pay deep attention to something, you know what is attention have you thought about it attention what is attention it's a beam of your own awareness directed by your will whenever you pay sharp attention to something your awareness comes into full play isn't it so attention is connected to awareness now what he is saying is him whom the Atman chooses if you pay enough attention to self-knowledge the entire your awareness will come into full bloom so in a way the awareness chooses to whom it will reveal itself Samajh mein aa raha hai aapko? Consciousness chooses to whom it will reveal itself Samajh mein aara hai aapko? Consciousness chooses to whom it will reveal itself. The meaning is this, you give so much your complete attention and you will have that knowledge that is the meaning. So you see he is actually pointing out how you can go move towards self-knowledge it is possible through self-effort if you put in the right kind of self- that itself is grace right kind of self effort itself is grace that brings you this knowledge any knowledge you see you have to put in the initial effort isn't it and then the knowledge is unraveled to you so this knowledge also is like that Bahut baar glibly we talk of this ki is it a theory, is it just a construct or is it really there... you see they are discussing our own real identity... so they ask for only this much... pay serious attention to what is being said... and you will get a glimpse of it... after this he gives one more hint... he says ... ... ... ... which means it can be known by a very refined sharp absolutely committed intellect that will catch a glimpse of the self what is the self we have discussed it in many classes what is it that they are talking about your real identity a unit of pure consciousness which you are which is manifesting through this body-mind complex how to get there this is our question isn't it intellectually we have an understanding how to get to the realization of it they are pointing to you techniques if you sharpen your intellect and direct it inwards your own identity will be revealed your your eye sense comes from where that will be revealed to you if you are not able to penetrate into it just like that through a very sharp intellect employ a method like yoga like niridhyasana, a meditation technique some upasana technique, still your mind sharpen your intellect and go within it will be revealed to you, you will get some glimpse of it at least so you see definite techniques have been given to do this and without this knowledge as I have been telling you throughout the classes without this knowledge you see have been telling you throughout the classes, without this knowledge you see if you have everything in life but you do not know what life is, you do not know who you are, does it make any sense? You have everything else but you do not know who you are, your sense of yourself is constantly changing, you do not know what is your real identity identity what the real I means in you what is the unchanging element in you so it nothing will make much sense without this and it is through this actual the subject is studying the objective world isn't it so knowledge of the subject it's not a matter of choice if you don't penetrate get something of this at least think deeply about it you will not get the fulfillment that human life offers. See this for yourself, in fact it is this urge only which has made you take this course also, what exactly you are seeking for, it is right within you they are telling you or uske liye technique bhi hai, how to go there and get it and you can get it through all these means they are pointing out. So it should be a matter of deep interest to us without this you you know you can never be sure how your life will go so that is also mentioned through an analogy of a chariot and is a famous analogy from the Kathopanishad mevatu buddhim tu sarathim viddhi mana pragraha mevacha indriyani haya naahu vishan steshu gocharan atme indriya mano yuktam bhogte tyahur munishinah the meaning is they are conceiving human life to be like a chariot ride you know who's the rider that is the atman the body is the chariot and the reins that is the mind the charioteer is your intellect the buddhi and the horses are the horses are your senses now you see for a chariot ride to be smooth and for the chariot to properly reach its destination what all needs to happen first of all the the horses you know they must be they must move on track isn't it if they go out of track your chariot is going you are going to go somewhere else for that what what do they do in a chariot have you seen chariots they keep the horses blinkered in the human, the senses are the horses. Do we put blinkers? I told you in one class that the contents of your mind are decided by your sense exposures. Those blinkers mean this. To a certain extent, your gaze should be directed towards what you want to achieve and how deep a life you want to live. If your gaze is just directed towards everything, everything is going to get into your mind. The selection process starts right here. So select the best for yourself always in life and you will have a marvelous life, a very elevating life. So first thing is the senses have to be blinkered and then the reins should be held tight, isn't it? The mind are the reins. If you keep your mind very loose, absolutely no discipline in life, absolutely no concentration techniques practiced, just living a kind of erratic life, the reins are very loose. No matter who is the rider or what kind of chariototeer you have if the mind is loose you cannot control the chariot of your life isn't this true who is a charioteer here your buddhi if he is an intelligent and responsible person you will have a good ride if he is drunk or he is not even awake half conscious will you have a smooth ride he will not hold the reins tight. So buddhi is the next element, you have to be particular, live a conscious, intelligent life, live a life committed to higher values. Ye sab bheethar ki cheeze andar se aani chahiye, ki this is the way I want to lead my life, this is the road I want to travel to my destination and then well the body is the chariot ok that is what is moving through the road of life and the rider is the Atman you see the charioteer will take orders only from there from the rider so how your soul is disposed towards what what is your ultimate goal in life that is going to decide how your chariot is going to go so you see at every level some amount of discipline conscious control is being asked and then you have a very smooth ride he says otherwise you don't know you may even go off the road so that's why these kind of analogies are given very many more beautiful ideas are given in this Upanishad but we have only limited time so I will go only bit by bit by giving you all these ideas what are they trying to tell you aapki jo aapka jo parichay hai aapki jo identity hai there is a unchanging core unit to it if you have a glimpse of that your entire mechanism of body mind intellect everything can be controlled and brought into fruition brought into fulfillment if that unit is not you don't identify yourself with that you will not know how to handle this apparatus which you are calling the subject the body-mind complex is selfya self-knowledge itna important hota hai I told you it's not a matter of choice if you don't do some research at this level the person who is handling this world who is handling the objective world who is seeing the objective world who is perceiving the objective world if that person itself is shaken you have no knowledge of the subject you will not be able to handle your situations properly, your environment properly. So that is why repeatedly this is being said. Now naturally a question pops up here this Atman concept is it a theory a kind of theory constructed by this philosophy of Vedanta actually what is Vedanta analyzing it is not constructing theory is a thought construct isn't it it is not doing that it is analyzing your existential awareness you see there are certain basic facts in your life which will show you that there must be the real I must be somewhere deep within in the form of consciousness like I told you you can cognize your mind as an object mind is an object of cognizance what does this mean you're apart from your mind you pass through three states of experience Jagrat, Swapna, Sushupti you pass through three states means you must be apart from them you are able to say something about them which means you are apart from them you have conscious experiences which means what there must be consciousness in you for you to have conscious experiences you see how many clues I'm giving you it's in your own experience you have memories unless there is an unchanging un-mutating knower in the background how do you connect two experiences in the form of memory tell me do you see this the clues are right in your own experience this is called which are existential inquiry if you do this repeatedly you will become convinced of the fact there must be an enduring knower I may not have been able to reach that state but at least this conviction will come that's the real I so this is the technique which Vedanta actually uses and it gives a lot of logical backup to this a lot of logic is used in Vedanta so don't think it's just a theoretical construct the concept of Atman you can penetrate into this knowledge this is what meditation is about today we will go deep into meditation techniques because last class I stopped at Pratyahar we will go today into Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi we will go into this how it reveals to you this knowledge but the essential point for you to note here is we will have intellectual ideas we will have logical forms in Vedanta all of this but the essential thing is the experience the experience has to be caught if you are of that type like a Naciketa you will your the conviction will arise immediately but some a little amount of meditation will put you into that state so it is quite possible how is logic actually used in Vedanta do you know as a support to existential inquiry as a support to it now let me give you an example here many of you would have asked this question is there a God is there God Ab Jobi kaho whether you call him Brahman as it is called in the Upanishads or Ishwar or whatever you call it you see there is there is this vast creation spread out before you it's a very intelligent creation isn't it so there must be intelligence behind even in your information systems what creates knowledge tell me it is intelligence that creates information always so if there is a very intelligent design there must be a very intelligent designer isn't it so what I'm trying to tell you is how logically they are supporting some of these views. Again they say God is omniscient, omnipresent, omnipotent what is the meaning of all this? Whenever you create a design, what is happening is the designer has created the design and the designer knows all about the design is not it that is why he has created it which means he is omniscient he knows about the design. So, if there is this wonderful world well designed world spread out before you the designer must be omniscient he knows about his design. He is omnipotent because the designer always invests himself in the design. He is he is able to mingle with the design, is not it? He has a potential to create that design and he is omniscient, omnipotent and omnipresent because he is part of the design, it is created from his mind. So, you see God has all these characteristics also what I'm trying to tell you is in different ways today we will study some of these logical systems also in different ways logically they have tried to support existential inquiry there is a difference between the yoga system and the Vedanta system you know yoga jo hum study karenge aaj, it is actually based on a dualistic system. Sankhya Yoga, aapne suna hoga. Sankhya is a system of philosophy propounded by Kapila, Kapil Muni. And yoga is drawn from that, much of yoga techniques. So it is dualistic in outlook. But, so if it is dualistic, what does it mean? it means there are two realities there are two realities it's called Purusha and Prakriti technically Purusha is consciousness and Prakriti is Jada and yoga is actually the separation of Purusha and Prakriti so you're moving towards consciousness you remove what is jad what is not conscious now the technique you see this is the basic outlook of yoga but Vedanta will tell you if you just know what is real the unreal will have no power over you, you see I want I want you to just notice the difference between these two techniques just if you know what is real will the unreal hold you it won't hold you so it is a discrimination between the self and the non-self in Vedanta it is not based on a dualistic framework as yoga is based this is a basic difference in yoga system the mind is actually somehow it has to be brought under control because finally they will tell you your real nature awareness it is actually mixed up in a sense with the mind with the thought process and at its at its highest level it is mixed up with your intellect see you may not be identifying yourself with your body you may not identify yourself with your thoughts but you're always almost always identified with your intellect that is what is gauging everything isn't it understanding everything so since you are identified with it the actual break should come there it's called vivek khyati technically in yoga sutras which means the awareness is separated from the buddhi sattva the higher intellect if you are able to do that you will catch pure awareness how to dive into the subject through yoga this is the yes you see vivek khyat is a very technical concept in Yog Sutras what they are trying to tell you is you are identified at all levels with the body, with the mind and with the intellect. But still your identification with the body is minimal. Most of the time watch and see you are not conscious of your body. But with your mind, with your thoughts you are more identified. But with your intellect you are more identified. But with your intellect, you are most identified. Now through yoga, through the practice of meditation, if at the higher levels of meditation, you can bring about a break between awareness and this higher intelligence, which means what? You separate buddhi from pure awareness. If you are able to do that, awareness is different from buddhisattva. It is very difficult to understand at this stage, because we are not close to the state of samadhi just now. We are just thinking. We are cogitating. So in that state, if you can bring about this split, you will generate a very high level of awareness, what is called Ritambara Prajna. Technical terms I am giving you it means truth bearing intuition it takes you directly into self knowledge. Ye kaise hota hai hum study karenge at the end today we are going to study this only. But I am just telling you how they are trying to help you move towards self knowledge. Prajna is a it is a very potent word. It means knowledge of the truth, truth bearing intuition. If you can get prajna, if you can be ushered into that state, you will get a clear glimpse of the self. And this is what yoga actually aims to do anyway we will be going into this later on in many of our scriptures the support to self knowledge has been given to be yoga meditation, kyunki aise hi ye knowledge humein nahi mil raha hai na see if you know you are the self does it bring you the realization of the self the mind has to be trained at a certain level it will open up to reality this is the usual procedure there are very great minds which can penetrate straight into reality like Raman Marshi for instance just one logical question and he could penetrate but for most people they need a kind of methodology to go into it. So in many scriptures you will find recommendation of a number of yogic techniques, a number of ways of meditation and in Brahma Sutras also which is actually the logical support of the Upanishads I found 3 references to meditation techniques to yoga, bed ke man ko control karke ye cheez karni hai that is why we have introduced that small assignment of meditation. Some practice of handling the mind should be there. So you see through all these techniques we are going to try to understand self-knowledge. But what I want to dwell a little now, what I want to take up a bit is how exactly theories are constructed. why are we telling you that all this is not theory. So, we will take up a little this not in your syllabus, but it is important for you to know the structure of scientific theories, we will take this up a little in order to prove what that a thought construct is not the ultimate thing. See how are theories there is a book actually the structure of scientific theories by Thomas Kuhn, have you heard of it any of you, it is a famous book. There well let us not go into the details of that book, but this much you should understand when you construct a theory, usually there are 3 views to the creation of theories. One is called the syntactic view, syntactic view, then the semantic view and the pragmatic view. In syntactic view the basic question asked is what is the logical form I should use in order to create a theory? Logic is a way of training your mind to think linearly. So, using logic how do I create the theory? Semantic view will tell you what mathematical model should I use in order to create that theory. The pragmatic view of course, is of what use will be the theory. So, using these three thought constructs are built and that is how you have a number of theories, but remember this a theory is a thought construct based on an agenda or it may not then there may not be an agenda is just a thought construct based on certain principles, based on a fundamental logic that is why theories can be made and theories can fall also. Is not it? Is any theory permanent? You know the there is a famous statement by Eddington, the corridors of science are replete with the skeletons of discarded theories. You make up a theory, then you find more observable facts which contradict the theory, then theory falls another theory comes up. So, it is a hypothetically you proceed. Theories are built, theories fall also. Actually speaking, you know J.J. Thomson, he discovered the fact that electron is a particle and he won a Nobel Prize for that. His very son, George Thomson, he got the Nobel Prize for disproving that electron is a particle and it is a wave for proving that it is a wave. So you see theories are constructed theories are also discarded, but what we have to see is why I am taking up this subject of theory is a thought construct is a part of your mind but what the knowledge which Vedanta is trying to give you self knowledge it is not even part of your mind it is not a construct you will see how it is. Let me go into some logic basic logical systems see observe this otherwise you will miss the important points you see science uses its I am giving you very basic logic used in science and Vedanta very basic a number of very complicated logical systems are there but very basically science uses the law of identity a concept in a discourse must have same meaning obviously law of excluded middle a statement can be true or false if A is equal to A it means A is not equal to B. Law of contradiction if two statements contradict one another then only one can be true like A is equal to A or A is equal to B which means A is cannot is equal to A or B and law of sufficient reason. If you have sufficient reason to believe what is reason what is reasoning? Yes, yes logical explanation of something and usually science is using inductive inference but in Vedanta you see it has its own logical format I'm giving you I'm telling you know very very briefly I'm putting it there's a correspondence theory which which says truth corresponds to reality yatha tatha jnanam it's called that is called prama, prama is true knowledge knowing thing a thing as it is, is true knowledge. Truth is conformity or coherence to a proposition within a system of thought, is not this true like for example the three angles of a triangle, within the system of your Euclidean geometry this holds, otherwise it bears no sense, is not it. So within a system of thought if it bears coherence then it is true. Non-contradiction you see the same theory the same logic is used both in science and Vedanta. Abadhi tarta visheka jnanam prama this is also an important logical point and then truth is verifiable and fruitful again pragmatism it is the same science and Vedanta it should be verifiable and it should be fruitful only the inference here used is syllogistic inference usually Shastra Praman it is called Shastra is used as an that is why you see Vedanta the study of Vedanta is so important not just trains your mind it will give you hints clues to self to self knowledge and it has a number of, it gives you a number of inferences. So as we are studying, you see when I start every class, I am taking up something from Shastra, is not it? The Vedanta which you are learning, it is directly from the Upanishads. So this is the kind of inference used. What is syllogistic means using two statements you are trying to create an inference. I will take up examples and show you. Now in why I jump to this structure of scientific revolutions is because we are studying the creation of theory. See logical systems are used both in science and Vedanta, but in science you are using logic itself to create the theory, but I told you in Vedanta you are using existential enquiry supported by logical system to create not a theory to create experience itself. So, you see in law in science this is how it works. This is a famous Kuhn cycle from the structure of scientific revolutions. There it is normal science it suffers may be a model crisis at some point then there is a model revolution a paradigm change in thinking and you come back to science. And in summary just watch that summary given there you You see there isin science there is a puzzle solving stage and scientists share a common paradigm, make measurements, articulate theory, make predictions. Then they find an anomaly, initially they blame the apparatus, set aside problems, modify the paradigm. Then they actually see a crisis andthey try to solve the crisis by having a paradigm shift, then that that is a change in the world view, a gestalt shift is made, problem seen from different perspective, new paradigms explored. And then there is the pre paradigm phase where alternative concepts are compared, exchanged and anarchy prevails for some time, fact gathering appears unguided and then a new paradigm is created. You see scientists return to routine, revelation becomes invisible and this becomes the next step in science. This is how a theory is created, falls, next hypothesis is put forth, again a new theory comes up. You see this is how it becomes part of science. This is the cycle usually scientific revolutions follow and Kuhn reiterates 5 criteria from the penultimate chapter of this his book that determine theory choice. What determines the choice of a theory? It should be accurate, it should be consistent, it should be broad scope, simple and fruitful um. It should be accurate empirically adequate with experimentation and observation. It should be consistent internally consistent, but also externally consistent with other theories. It should be broad scope or theories consequences should extend beyond that which it was initially designed to explain. It should be simple and it should be fruitful. It should disclose new phenomena or new relationships among phenomena, then it is accepted as a new theory in science. Now here different thinkers have put forth different forms of logic in creation of theory like for example, this is another famous book, some point in your life read these books, the logic of scientific discovery in which Karl Popper makes a very important statement. Just just read it you see I will I will just read it for you Karl Popper is a well known philosopher of science. Popper argues that science should adopt a methodology based on falsifiability because no number of experiments can ever prove a theory, but a reproducible experiment or observation can refute one. See the sense he is making. According to Popper non-reproducible single occurrences are of no significance to science. Thus a few stray basic statements contradicting a theory will hardly induce us to reject it as falsified. We shall take it as falsified only if we discover a reproducible effect which refutes the theory. Popper argues that science should adopt a methodology based on an asymmetry between verifiability and falsifiability. An asymmetry which results from the logical form of universal statements for these are never derivable from singular statements but can be contradicted by singular statements. So falsifiability figures prominently as Popper's method for testing theories. He repeatedly shows the theories are never verifiable only falsifiable. Are you getting the point? Popper finds inductive logic internally inconsistent to do this. Instead he supports deductive reasoning as empirically scientific deductive systems avoid many of the pitfalls of metaphysical thinking and psychologism by requiring continued testing for falsifiability. The point he is they are he is making is this before you accept a theory you must know the underlying logic, you must decipher the mathematical model because there is any every chance for a theory to change. When does a theory, when will it not change, tell me? Address all the variables. Yes, you are able to address all the variables and most of all if it is based on some experience you see many times what happens is Vedanta and all this is dismissed as subjective experience, but it is experience to you as the subject that is what makes us makes it so authentic. Why I am telling you Vedanta is not a theory is you as the subject are experiencing some things which are being an analyzed and given put in a logical format that is what Vedanta is doing for you. Any other theory can be falsified you can change the logical structures you can change the thought construct you understand this is the difference between existential enquiry and theoretical explanation creation of a theory. For this we have gone into this. Now let me go into yes the actual process which we are going to some things which are very useful to you. Let me tell you that first of all. You see before you can penetrate into whatever you are we are calling existential enquiry or self-knowledge or whatever there are certain existential enquiry or self knowledge or whatever there are certain conditions to be satisfied. First of all you have already studied something of yama and niyama and all these things mindfulness is a very important point you should know. We are studying yoga vedanta if you are mindful of something if there is a huge amount of awareness you have brought into your study of something you will be able to solve all problems that you encounter, you will be able to attack that problem with full energy and proceed. If you are not mindful, only half conscious, mindfulness ka matlab aapko pata hai na, you have brought entire attention into because the undercurrent of attention is awareness. If you are only half conscious, you are not you will not be a problem-solving stage you will not be able to do and you will face a number of problems into anything you just watch this whole thing. You see in any challenging work situation how mindfulness works as an on-the-spot intervention. Yes, some nai ideas hai aap up Kelly, but for those meditators, for those who practice meditation, this is a very important thing to do. If you are mindful of something, you can solve any challenge. See, if you are, if there's a challenging work situation, usually the unconscious response will be in the form of threat activation or negative emotions. You're true Hannah. response will be in the form of threat activation or negative emotions. If you do not have not put enough conscious thought to something, you will usually be threatened by it or you will have negative emotions about it. If you have a conscious response, you are first of all aware of the situation and the awareness means to be mindful, the awareness to be mindful, the need to be mindful will come through that awareness. So, you see a conscious response is so important. Now on the spot mindfulness, what will it do for you in such a situation is, it will give you techniques to step down threat response and prevent escalation of threat, is not this true? Otherwise you live in a sort of fear, if you are only half conscious or partially conscious, you cannot even have knowledge, get knowledge of the situation, that creates threats for you, exam fear kyu hota hai, wrong decisions kyu hota hai, these are all your challenging life situations for which you need mindfulness. So you gather present moment facts only when you are mindful and you can step down or prevent escalation of threat and negative feelings only if you are mindful. So this is a very important thing for you to understand. Bringing your conscious attention spans into your hands, half consciously doing something, forgetting about what you do, remaining engaged in opposite things. If you do all this, you will lose this mindfulness technique. Then increased focus and clarity, this is what it gives you in the next stage you see. So, this naturally leads to decreased threat activation. Obviously, you have brought more clarity there and decreased negative emotions. So, you can handle the situation what will the outcome be improved performance in negotiations and decreased counterproductive workplace behaviors. Many times you you sort of undo your your own good, is not it in many situations by reacting sharply or wrongly and by what are called counterproductive behaviors but if you are mindful of every situation you can overcome this problem. So your mindfulness technique is there now it is called vipassana isn't it. Now this is basic to yoga science very basic yoga cannot be done half-mindedly or half-heartedly which means consciously approaching the problem it will awaken higher and higher awareness in you if you consciously attack the problem any situation if you can remain mindful what what is it that helps you remain mindful can you tell me mindfulness ka matlab kya hai control more and more awareness is coming into the mind you are aware even when thoughts are not there awareness is there you are mindful your entire mind is there it is not actually bogged down by thought emotion or negative emotion or memory or anything like that you're always conscious more and more conscious now you see I will give you five states of your own mind which are going to determine your experience of life please see this carefully the very first state is mudha where the mind the state of mind is dull and indolent jab man mein bahut tamas hota hai na this is the state kabhi kabhi hota hai na yeh man mein you don't want to get up from bed the mind simply doesn't want to think tomorrow you have an assignment but there's no effort towards it so this is that state second is kshipta these are all states of your own mind please see this carefully kshipta is the distracted or restless state when you know what you should do but well energy nahi hai somehow you want to just distract yourself the third is the vikshipta state five states of your own mind vikshipta state means it is scattered, your attention is scattered but occasionally preoccupied, the fourth is ekagra state that is concentrated or what is called flow we have discussed this in flow, the last is nirudhav, the mastered and restrained state now you see which state of mind you bring into operation is going to decide what kind of experience you get from the object in front of you. Isn't this true? Object waha hai just to experience it, aisa nahi hai. What state of mind you brought to study that object is going to decide how much knowledge or experience you are going to get from that object. That is why it is important to study the subject, this is what I am telling you. If you bring only mudha and kshiptha minds into a very strong mathematical class, you are not going to get much out of it. If you bring a ekagra mind, you will get a lot out of it. Even in a Vedanta class it's like that what type of mind you bring is going to decide how much knowledge you will get knowledge is not there just on the board how much you are able to absorb that is decided by the quality of your mind now the last two states you see a self directed and self sustained they must become they must come by default this ekagra and nirudha state this is the goal of yoga to be mindful means this to make these states natural so learning to make these two states natural is our goal which means what you remain in a kind of concentrated state where you have mastery over yourself these are all preliminaries before we study dhyan, dharana all these things you must know you must be acquainted with what is happening in your mind that is why this is being given to you another thing very important thing which you should know here is I told you earlier also in a class that emotional intelligence should be there for you to be able to handle mind well, emotional maturity should be there. Have you given thought to this? Most of your problems are emotional. If you are not able to handle emotions properly and positive emotions do not dwell in your mind, you know it is very difficult to practice any high level concentration technique, you will be simply led away from all this, by just by the force of emotion you will be led away. certain amount degree of emotional maturity is required in order to dive into yoga. So a little bit we will discuss what this emotional maturity means, keeping your emotions in balance, keeping your emotions in harmony, how how does it come about, are there techniques for this, have you thought about it, are there techniques for positive emotions, thought about it are there techniques for positive emotions you see there are a number of techniques for this habitually keeping positive states of mind the mind in positive emotion it is very important for your development very important for your concentration very important for you to dive into yoga also if only you are used to negative emotions and just getting, you are riding the waves of emotions all the time, uncontrolled emotional thinking, then it is not possible to achieve very high levels of concentration. So this is something you have to learn. One way of controlling emotion is committing your energy to high levels committing emotion to a particular level don't play with emotions they are not meant to be played with committed emotions will keep your energy at a certain level Vivekananda used to always say this you see actually speaking until you encounter your own true nature you will be seeking for all kinds of experiences outside of yourself you actually will look for love outside of yourself when you are actually loving something somebody you are imposing your own perfect ideal on that person so in a way you are loving yourself through another angle, otherwise you are just carried away by your emotions, try to understand the psychology behind it. And another thing which you should know is, first of all not to play with emotions, it is an energy, it is a very high level energy and keeping emotions pure, this is very important you see your life will be as authentic as your love is authentic if emotion is the purity of emotion is not maintained you will not get anything out of it if love is not pure it has no meaning it cannot be called love at all so committing yourself to these levels this is important for to practice yoga bahut log kya karte hain, they feel yoga is only they are just concentration techniques it is not so it has to do with your entire personality is not just training the mind in concentration so a large amount of emotional maturity is required for you to handle your mind and dive deep into the depths of your mind. Let me give you some facts here about well they are very practical things which you need to know about catching emotions ok. Emotions can be caught you see this is all this data will help you in correcting certain ways of life. Germs are not the only things you should worry about catching. Emotions are also infectious according to research on social contagions. Have you heard of this word social contagion which means moods and behaviors that spread from person to person. Positive feelings are contagious. According to a study of almost 5000 people by researchers at Harvard and the University of California, when you feel happy, a friend who lives within 1.5 kilometers is 25 percent more likely to be happy. Why? He is your friend, mind affects mind. The neighbors are 34% likely to be more happy because they are close to your ambit. You understand how we influence each other? This is all data which has been found, scientific data. The same data found that an extra dollar 5000 increased happiness by about 2% only while meeting a joyful friend of a friend boosted happiness and good feelings by 10% you see it's a second order connection a friend of your friend but it boosted your happiness by 10% which means what human relationships are more important than money, your emotional intelligence skills are more important than IQ just earning money there are there are you must understand some of these basic things about happiness if you are not able to develop positive emotions and as I told you keep your love pure direct your energy upward that's why I told you the importance of devotion isn't it, devotion is something which naturally elevates your emotion to a very high level. So if you are not able to do all this you will have you struggle with your mind, easily understand some of these basic facts. Similarly first-year students randomly paired to roommates, roomies highly prone to brooding were likely to catch their negative thinking style after only 3 months. If your roommate is a brooder, in 3 months you will also be a brooder. Thus other people influence how we respond to life's challenges. This is a world of influence, Vivekananda used to say this. This is a world of influence, we influence each other's minds so the company you keep the type of people you associate with all this becomes important in the practice of yoga you see the human brain is also hardwired to detect stress and increase in breathing rate of the person beside you check and see just now triggers a cascade of your own stress hormones if the if your neighbor is the person beside you check and see just now triggers a cascade of your own stress hormones if the if your neighbor is stressful you are going to catch stress. If your neighbor is a happy type you will be happy after some time not immediately so and you do not need to be in the same room to catch someone's stress it is transmittable via email and social media text texting all this because you know you are actually what you are experiencing are emotions when you get into all this and they are transmittable in all these ways so be careful all this why I am telling you is satsang importance right association is important if you are planning you're aiming at controlling your mind you must have a good influence around you if all the time all sorts of influences are falling on you it becomes a little difficult to control your mind so you must know these are basic scientific facts you see that this is what they're telling you now we will go into another concept which is useful to you what is attention? Before you learn Dhyan, meditation you must know what is what attention span means, what is your attention? See attention is actually a beam of your awareness directed by your will attention is actually a beam of your awareness directed by your will. So, the undercurrents of attention naturally become awareness and will, these are the two main things. Now, your awareness is usually invested in your thought process, that is why we say pay attention means what exclude other thoughts. So, what happens you are you're able to direct awareness in a sense wherever you want and will your ordinary will if it is very scattered which means apne koi sankalp hi nahi kiya hai abhi tak ki nahi yeh course lena hai ya yeh complete karna hai if you have not taken this kind of a sankalp if you have not fixed your will you will not be able to manufacture high level attention. So, this you should know what exactly attention means how to get it, how to manufacture it in my system. Awareness and will these two should be fixed you see you do not actually fix awareness, awareness is an essential part of you, you are awareness but how you direct it, an essential part of you, you are awareness but how you direct it, how much you are able to control your thoughts and keep your attention at one point is going to decide your success in life. So take charge of yourself but remember one thing also if you do not have worthy goals then it's no use developing very high concentration techniques. Your very concentrated mind can become like a very powerful bomb, bombshell if you do not know how to direct that concentration, where to put it. If you keep concentrating on the wrong things there's no meaning in developing concentration isn't it? Life goal should be elevated. Otherwise a very concentrated mind, you know Hitler's mind was very concentrated. It can become like that. So it can destroy if you have not elevated life energy and if you do not have very high goals in life. So understand this is all connected. Isiliye hum kehateate hain some amount of life changes are required structuring your life in a sattvic way is required. Now the art of attention has these following points just pay attention a daily practice will help you build attention it is called anu sankalp which means a daily resolve to concentrate on our goals ye aap karte ho? Sankalp karte ho ya kabhi sankalpe hi nahi kiya hai? I have this goal to reach in. In this time I will reach this goal. Isko anu sankalp kehte hai. If you keep doing this repeatedly, your mind will get trained in fixing your will. Agar sankalp nahi kar rahe ho somehow you are drifting through life you will miss some of the very important experiences of life sankalp is important that is why I deliberately direct my life in a particular way then calm mind through planned routine you see calm disposition is antidote to stress do you know that basic calmness of mind today's you are in an excitability mode and that only is recommended all the time but if you have not learnt to generate calmness through relaxation techniques relaxation actually means calmness and not sleep you know many people try to fall go into long periods of sleep in order to remain calm that will not generate calmness that generates tamas Dekha hai aapne yeh? Kahi log to uthte hi nahi hai. They get up at 11-12 in the morning because of the mind is so depressed what shall I do getting up there's no goal so don't reduce yourself to all such stupid states calmness is the property of a noble mind agar achche sanskar ho to mind hamesha calm rahega otherwise it will be perpetually restless true inner calm comes from honest hard work so calm mind is equal to calmness it's equal to success a calm mind has plenty of time you know the restlessness of your mind makes you say I have no time it is our restlessness that follows time mind has limited cognitive capacity so utilize it best it's an instrument given in your hands if you do not know how to handle it you will waste your life the most important thing for you to know so yoga the practice of extracting awareness you see well you just know we need not go into this but understand yoga to be a method for you to enhance your awareness positive attitudes have therapeutic effect on mind Positive attitudes have therapeutic effect on mind, non-judgmental thinking helps extract awareness, remember mental states become neural traits, your mind, the thoughts in your mind creates the neural structure, the neural mechanics of your brain. So have the right attitude, circulate the right thoughts. Principles of contemplative neuroscience, there is a field like that today, contemplative neuroscience are gratefulness, contentment, compassion, simple living, high thinking principles. If you just adopt this, you will be happy I am telling you. There is a whole branch now, it's called contemplative neuroscience you see the simple principles gratefulness contentment compassion high simple living high thinking principles there is no substitute to clean life that's the bottom line honest purposeful pure and dedicated to high ideals it keeps both body and mind healthy now we will go into dharana, dhyana and samadhi. This now I'm going to draw and show it to you because you need something diagrammatic in order to understand. Dekhe pratyahara we had covered in the last class, withdrawal of mind. Next step is we are going to go into dharana before you attain the state of meditation, what should be the state of your mind, you know I had once explained to you what vritti and pratyaya is, isn't it? Vritti is modification of your mind due to a thought, thought is pratyaya, it may be a thought due to an external exposure or it may be due to internal memory, your thoughts, are you getting catch every point otherwise you will miss the essential thing we had discussed vritti and pratyaya, vritti is a modification of your mind due to a thought so now let me just draw some vrittis and pratyayas and you will understand what meditation means you see the ordinary state of your mind mind. You maybe you would not understand what I am drawing, but I will just tell you this is the ordinary state of your mind. Now watch the diagram, this is these are vrittis, what is inside this is the pratyay, vritti means modification of your mind okay and pratyay means content of your mind, which means a thought. Now you see in the first vritti you had a thought of your whatsapp message let us say, then in the next vritti you had you thought of your email. After that again the you see the vritti is so very erratic, there is no stability about it all kinds of shapes and you thought suddenly of your breakfast what you had for breakfast. In the next vritti you remembered your assignment which means what the content of the vritti is totally different in every vritti and every vritti is erratic of any shape any size anyhow it is going your ordinary state of mind is like this there is no ordered structured thought now what does dharana mean the state of dharana mean? The state of dharana means you are having ordered vrittis first of all, they rise and fall in an order but the content of the vritti, suppose you are trying to practice meditation, so you are thinking of OM, the content is usually the same, in the middle suddenly you remembered your some text, then again OM and then you remembered a WhatsApp message like this, you have brought your vrittis into a kind of orderly structure and the content is almost the same but sometimes the content that is the pratyaya varies so you have brought yourself into the state of dharana now are you understanding this is how you are actually if you close your senses and watch your mind this is what is happening usually your mind is very erratic all kinds of modifications going on in your mind all kinds of thoughts are cropping up so this is the first stage when you start practicing meditation first stage is dharana the modifications of your mind have become stable and the content of your mind has also become stable and the content of your mind has also become stable occasionally a little distracted thought pops in now what is dhyan? dhyan is when the vritti the pratyaya is unchanging and the vritti rises and falls at the same point there is no moment in the vritti rises and falls at the same point there is no movement in the vritti you see this is dhyan kya hua hai yaha par aap dekho pratyaya is the same which means the content of your mind is unchanging only one object occupies your mind and the modification of your mind is not there practically because there is no movement in the mind are you seeing it did you understand the difference between dhyana and dharana what what has happened the object does not change in meditation agar aap jab meditate kar rahe ho many things are entering or entering flowering in your field of consciousness that is not yet dhyana that is dharana. If only one object is there and the modifications of your mind are similar same falling at the same point no movement of vrittis then you are in the state of dhyana that is why this is defined as pratyaya ekatanata pratyaya ekatanata dhyanam, patanjali yogasutras which means what one pratyaya only one pratyaya continuously manifesting in your field of consciousness the vrittis rising and falling at the same point no change in the vrittis so now you are in a state of deep absorption meditation what is samadhi? I will have to wipe out one to put samadhi not going up ok next in samadhi what happens is you see you must compare dhyan and samadhi this is dhyan picture I'm drawing here the vritti is rising and falling at the same point and the prathay is unchanging same this is dhyan ok in samadhi what happens is there is absolutely no modification of mind only the object occupies your field of awareness so it is called Artha Matra Nirbhasa which means only the field of concentrate only the object of concentration has occupied your entire field of awareness there is no mind so to say you are absolutely absorbed in that object in dhyan you still thought you are meditating on that object because you see vritti is there so there is a meditator process of meditation and object of meditation it is called Triputi, tripartite distinction between these three but in Samadhi state this Triputi vanishes there is no more distinction only the object of meditation occupies your field of awareness nothing else is there you are absorbed in that so this level of absorption if you can attain you will get self-knowledge this level of absorption is required where there is no mind activity when you see you have actually transcended mind because there is no vritti. Isile artha mata what what this level of concentration does you know dhyan is usually understood that if for 144 seconds you can maintain the state of similar vritti and unchanging pratyaya it is called dhyan. Ye aap note karlo 144 seconds same vritti and unchanging content if you can maintain it is called meditation in yoga. In samadhi you are absorbed in the object without a vritti without the sense of meditation meditating and if you are able to get rid of the distinction between meditator, meditation and object of meditation only the object occupies your entire field of vision you are able to get rid of the distinction between meditator, meditation and object of meditation only the object occupies your entire field of vision, you are absorbed in that that is the state of Samadhi getting that what actually happens is you get identified with the object you become one with the object, you get the real knowledge of the object iska matlab hai if you are concentrating on home or whatever a spark of light in your heart God whatever you have actually converted the subject into that is come up with you have become one with that that is the only way you actually get knowledge of something yeah go some of that was killed over only if you practice meditation you will understand this you see when you are in a concentrated state of anger or something you have become one with anger isn't it when you are in a concentrated you feel joy at something you have become one with joy so also here in this stage you have become one with the object and the entire object in its entire glory is revealed to you so Artha Mata Nirbhasa the actual meaning of that object is unraveled to you so if you are concentrating on the self the Atman you will know the Atman, Brahma with Brahmaiva Bhavati means actually you know by being you become one with it, thus you know, it is actually a complete flowering of the pure unit of consciousness which you are, so Samadhi state it is to be you know how Samadhi has been studied, in his life he used to go into samadhi quite frequently. If you actually read his life and see many times Sri Ramakrishna used to go into samadhi in the course of a single day and once a doctor, Dr. Mahendralal Sarkar came with his friends to check and see what this samadhi is and they saw that Sri Ramakrishna was sitting deep in Samadhi absolutely still like a rock like a statue and then they went he went closely and checked if breathing was there you see the absorption is of such a at such a level breathing is not there he put a stethoscope and saw if heartbeat is there heartbeat is not there after some time the man comes back after some time he comes back radiant with joy and happiness and full of knowledge and seeing this Mahindula Sarkar thought what what kind of a state is this is this possible that you can suspend life activity like this you see we have not understood what life means because we don't understand what consciousness means and that is why ye sab hume lagta hai oh it's an esoteric kind of technique this level of concentration is possible where you transcend life activity actually speaking you know level of concentration is possible where you transcend life activity actually speaking you know pancha prana kehte hai na, there are five pranas, yogis retain one or two pranas and the rest of them they allow them to merge also in awareness and that is why they are able to manifest, they are able to go into samadhi come out of it and again he comes into normal awareness again after some time he goes into samadhi this is a possibility for people of that stature we don't hold people like Sri Ramakrishna Paramhamsa to be of ordinary human level because the development of his mind whatever whatever you say it is of a very high caliber. So it is possible to attain this and it is possible to get knowledge from this for this only we are studying if you ask me actually this kind of a state is it possible for us to attain you have to pass through that state of yoga but just now you can get hints and clues to what is being said isn't it many of the next class one of the classes we will take up clues to self-knowledge but the idea is this even now you are that very being who you you are wanting to attain through Samadhi even now your present state of awareness it is nothing but that unit of consciousness getting reflected in your mind are you catching this point that very consciousness which we are calling Atman, Brahman whatever that its reflection in your mind is your present state of awareness through which the mind is functioning you are perceiving objects so if this awareness can be reduced to its can be taken to its pure form to its source it will give yield self-knowledge for you the technique is given like this do you have any questions on this dhyan dharana and samadhi yes yes The ultimate aim of Samadhi is to know the thing as it is, to know anything as, suppose now you have a question like what is the self, what is it actually, how will you know it? You see you can know an object which is outside of you through your eyes isn't it because it's in front of you if something is not an object in front of you how else will you know it tell me you have to experience it within yourself so you have to turn the mind inward and that is why a kind of scheme of yoga is given to you but basically what you have to understand in Vedanta, it is not like that I have to follow a kind of enormous scheme sometime and then I will be able to get this experience basically your present state of awareness or conscious, the fact that you're getting conscious experiences that itself means there's a reflection of this truth somewhere in your mind isn't it? that's in your mind isn't it that's why your mind is becoming aware that is why you are getting conscious experiences once we discuss the difference between a jada vastu and a conscious vastu isn't it so that is why you're getting it it's a reflection of this so why why should I try to attain samadhi The simple answer to that question is if you want to know anything deeply, you will try to turn the mind inward This state has been studied by very many western scholars also because it gives you knowledge of the thing as it is Anything? because it gives you knowledge of the thing as it is anything. Starting and ending point of vritti see what is a vritti it is the modification of your mind due to a thought modification of mind due to a thought, this is the thought, pratyay it is called, this is vritti. Now what is happening is whenever there is a thought in your mind, your mind undergoes a modification, it is leaving an impact on your mind any thought isilya thoughts it important hote ha just having any kind of thinking it is actually affecting your mind please see this so now in dhyan what what you're trying to do is you are trying to focus so much on your object of meditation like here om that the vritti becomes absolutely stable it is rising and falling at the same point if you are able to generate this state you will get immense joy up they call you are capable of this state if you are able to generate this state it will unleash the joy within you if your object of meditation remains fixed it will give you complete knowledge of that object just the stability of your vritti you see this is what you are achieving stability of pratyaya and stability of vritti it will give you first-hand absolute knowledge of about the object and a kind of fulfilling joy from within so that is what Dhyan is about. yes what should be the object of Dhyan he is asking the object of dhyan should usually be something elevating even many people also practice dhyan on something which expands their awareness like an ocean or a bird flying or a mountain on the Sun on Om or maybe a deity, jo bhi aapko achcha lage, Krishna, Ram, whichever an elevating object is required because you know essentially what you're doing in yoga is you are committing vital energy to your heart, you are trying to meditate on the object there that is the practical technique of yoga which is given and for that if you have an elevating object there in your heart, if you are able to achieve this level of concentration, it will turn you your own awareness back to its source. You get the ability to remain fixed on that object at that point. It will lead to Samadhi. So always meditation should be on some something elevating. Choose anything for many people just sitting still in a beautiful natural place in nature that itself has a very elevating feeling. So it can be something like that concentrate on something very you know there is one statement in the Upanishad it says na alpe sukham asti, phumaiva sukham anything which expands your awareness it will give you joy anything which contracts your awareness will remove your joy yeh such baat hai na, why do you want to go to Himalayas or say want to see beautiful scenery or ocean ke beech mein kade hone se itna achha kyu lagta hai? your consciousness has expanded your awareness has expanded so naalpe sukha masti, bhumaiva sukham think about all this and see it impacts your own mind in a very big way your life will change otherwise you know you condition yourself to miserable joys and try to somehow extract pull out joy from others in your miserable way you will go into depression that way you must understand the mind mechanics in order to understand happiness how my mind works where do I get the greatest joys of life and what is available to the human experience, rationally survey it and see and naturally you will go into meditation if I can't control my mind no object can give you happiness you may have 10,000 wonderful objects around you if your mind is not in if it's in that mood or ship the state the object will not give you a joy you understand if your mind is in the right state you don't even need the object to give you a, isn't this true? Aap hi soch ke dekho. Yes anything else? No we will stop here, time is up.
 Thank you very much. Today's class we have something very interesting to discuss. So I hope you will enjoy it because it is a kind of meditation technique. Last time you remember you had asked me for meditation techniques. It's a kind of technique being taught to you. It's a vidya actually. Upanishadic meditation technique to discover the self, what we have been discovering what we have been discussing to discover the Atman this is one of the techniques it is called pancha-kosha vichara in Sanskrit which means you are discriminating through the five sheets to reach to the Atman the core of your personality structure which is a unit of pure consciousness called the Atman how to get there that is what this technique is teaching you you may remember in the first class I had given you a model of this Panchakoshas five sheets do you remember the model what did it tell you the real you is a unit of pure consciousness which is enshrouded or covered by five sheaths. The outermost sheath is the Annamayi Kosha which is your body. That is just the crust, outer crust of your personality. The second is the vital energy sheath, what is called Pranmayi Kosha. The vital energy is coursing within you. If you actually analyze your existential experience you will feel the truth of this and beyond that is the Manomayikosh the mind don't you feel yourself to be more mind usually you are not conscious of your body but you always feel aware a kind of awareness in the mind and you you can if you think of yourself just now you will feel you are an embodied mind so that is the Manomayakosh the third aspect of your personality paradigm beyond that is the Vijnanamayakosh the intellect with which you are always working so that's more a part not a part of you more you than anything else and finally beyond that is the Anandamayi Kosha which is the sheath of bliss and beyond this is the unit of pure consciousness which you are the Atman so how to discriminate and proceed towards this Atman and how to get self-knowledge that is what this Vidya this particular meditation technique is going to teach you you have to pay close attention to get what they are trying to say did you understand this human personality paradigm which I just now told you this is the Vedantic model of you you enclose the I enclosed in five sheets now this portion comes in the Taithirya Upanishad. It is called Bhrgu Valli and it is the third chapter of Taithirya Upanishad. It is a conversation between a father and son. The father is the Rishi Varuna and the son is Bhrgu. And this son goes to the father and tells him that I want to know who I am, who am I truly. The question he puts is what is Brahman, what is this ultimate reality which you are discussing about. So it translates into your experience as who am I, are you understanding it? Brahma and Atma are two things, are they two things? That very Brahman in you functions as this unit of pure consciousness, the Atman. In a way, you can say individualized Brahman is Atman. So he is actually asking, who am I? Did you get the point? So then how does this Rishi teach him how to go within? And he tells him, you see, the very first thing which he tells him is you know it is that very same reality which is manifesting through your body through your mind, through your senses so all of these are nothing but Brahman. Are you getting the point? Then he asks him but how do I get there? How do I get to self-knowledge? and then Varuna tells him, Tap brahma vijjignasasva try to know this reality through tapasya through austerity why austerity see when you want to know something there is a board there is a chalk there is a ppt presentations this is how we get knowledge isn't it of anything why do they ask for tapasya, some amount of austerity in order to get self knowledge? Can you tell me any of you? You see, a PPT presentation is given by somebody else. This knowledge you have to gain by yourself. And remember, any form of knowledge, what is it? Let us analyze knowledge. I will stop the story here for you to understand a few simple points. You see, when I know something or I perceive something, what is exactly happening? How do I know? Now how do I know this pen? You know the Vedantic explanation to this is, when you look at this pen, a vritti of this pen is created in your mind. You remember vritti, a kind of modification of this pen, is created, an image of it is created in your mind that is illumined by consciousness which is standing behind the mind and you get the idea that this is a pen. You acknowledge it of, you get the idea I know this pen because you are actually that unit of pure consciousness. Now this is perception or normal perception of an object. What are we trying to do in self-knowledge? You are trying to know that consciousness itself. It is not an object of perception, is it it's not outside of you it is that through which the mind works it is that awareness which is enlivening the mind itself and it is behind the mind so then what technique will you employ you have to turn the mind inward that is why tapasya is required. If it was an external object of perception, vritti jnan would have been sufficient. Vritti jnan is what I told you, creating a vritti in your mind, illumining it with consciousness. If it is not an object of perception, if it is the very source of the perceptive process, naturally vritti jnan will not be enough, isn't it? You have to turn the mind towards its source it is called swaroopa jnan and that is what this technique is going to teach you and that is the way to get self-knowledge so a little amount of austerity means what turning your senses and mind a little inward trying to track the subject within you that is what tapasya is meant for aap aisa mat socho ki wo log dhyan karke bethe to bethe we don't know what they are doing, they are employing very solid subjective science techniques in order to in order to get self-knowledge in order to reach the self so understand these are all well-defined techniques they are called vidyas that is why today we have lost a huge portion of this literature, but it is a very important part of Vedanta, the Vedic literature to actually know how to get to the self, to actually understand these techniques. So one of these techniques is this, you see, once he understood the importance of tapasya, Bhrigu went and started meditating on the supreme reality which he himself, you yourself are that, do not think Brahman as another concept, mera tattva kya hai, what is the reality about this I sense in me, that is what is called Brahman, that is actually you, so he is trying to find out who the I really is. When he starts meditating, suddenly the thought comes to his mind, annam brahmeti vyajanat, maybe this annamayikosh, which is this body, maybe this is me, this is all of me. Many times we think like this, don't we? The body is functioning in this world and I am identified with it so I am the body So he goes and asks his father that I think I am just this body And Varun Rishi tells him my son go back to your meditation Try to find out who you truly are Now tell me why you cannot be just the body Tell me Even after death does same body exist? Same body exist? why you cannot be just the body tell me same body exists listen first of all I will give you reasons the body is an object of your perception if it is an object in front of you can you be that this is the Rick the ratio Vivek this this is the scene you are the seer of this so the two must be different you are studying this body you can perfectly study what is medical science about it's about studying the body it is an object of perception and study for you so you can't be that you are the one who's studying the subject studying the object now we are going to start go penetrate into the subject This is one thing the body is an object of your perception Secondly you know you actually most of the time you are not conscious of your body Unless you are made conscious of it you are not conscious Sickness makes you conscious of your body A healthy body you are not even conscious of it Suppose there is some problem you suppose you have a stomach ache an external instrument like say a CT scan or a ultrasound or an endoscopy has to tell you what is the problem where you are not able to find out what is the problem where which means what your consciousness is minimally invested in your body. We have exaggerated and given primacy to the body maybe, but the fact of your existential experience is you are minimally conscious of it and when you change bodies you do not mind it. In dreams you may be wearing another body and you do not mind it. Suppose you love the character of superman in in your dream you became superman you got the body of superman and you don't mind it you're very happy about it which means what you are not frightened of changing bodies what you are actually frightened of is a break in your awareness if there's no continuity of my being of my awareness then that is like death that I'm frightened of what exactly of frightened of in death you death that I am frightened of what exactly you are frightened of in death you should understand you are frightened of non-existence you are frightened of the lack of awareness but you are not frightened of changing bodies are you getting the point so you cannot be the body in fact Vedanta will tell you this is the first mistake we make. If you think you are only the body, the entire attention will be only on that, your very purpose of life will be to attend to the body, bodily needs. So that becomes a very materialistic outlook. How much can you satisfy the body? Beyond a certain level it will only give you frustration in life. So this is the first point, that is why you are not the body then he continues with his meditation, who? Bhrigu and then after sometime it suddenly flashes in his mind maybe I am the vital energy coursing in my... see that's a subtler aspect of you vital energy, pranayik energy, ya apne kabhi mehsoos kiya hai today we are disconnected even with the terminology of it you see if you actually close your eyes and try to see what is what is the energy you feel within you the vitality you feel within you that is what is called vital energy pranayik energy so this is an aspect of you which is very important for yogis because they decide mind levels through pranic energy. Just like how we decide everything by means of thought, rational thought, there is a correlation between pranic energy and mind. If you commit pranic energy at certain junction points your mind reveals various states higher and higher states. So the thing is thought levels can be controlled by pranic energy. For yogis, they use it as a technique So it's a subtler aspect of rather than the body it's subtler to the body, the pranic energy to you So he thought maybe that is what, that is who I am and he goes back to his father and says, I think Brahman is nothing but this prana in me. And Varuna says, no my son, that's not the thing, go back to your meditation. And Bhrigu understands that, oh, so this is not the answer. Can you tell me why the pranayika energy is not you? answer can you tell me why the pranayika energy is not you? dekhi aapko abhi pata bhi nahi hai pranayika energy kya hai but you are functioning as an individual the pranayika energy has a way of increasing decreasing it has movement again it is an object of your perception so it cannot be you. It is another instrument in your hands to function. So he proceeds with his meditation. Then suddenly the thought occurs to him that, mano brahmeti vijanat, maybe the mind is me. So this is what we many of us feel, no, many times, I am my mind. Mano aur aap kya do cheeze hain? Many times you feel you are the mind. When he comes and tells his father, I think the truth about me is my mind. Again Varuna tells him no, this is not the answer. Now tell me why are you not the mind? Why you cannot be merely the mind? Think and tell me. Mind is an instrument in your hands but you are not the mind because mind can be studied mind is an object of cognizance for you and also mind is non self luminous it functions on borrowed consciousness it borrows consciousness from the Atman and gets becomes conscious that is why you know you have elements in the mind which can reflect or block consciousness they are called Tanmatras Kabhi kabhi aapka mind bahut fresh rehta hai kabhi kabhi dull ho jata hai hai na sometimes you are in a Rajasic state of mind sometimes in a Sattvic state sometimes in a Tamasic state itne sab changes hote hai mind me how can you be mind you are the observer of the mind it's an object of your perception it has various moods it directs your life but you are not the mind you can perfectly control the mind so he understands this is not the final truth about me this is another instrument in my hands then he continues with his meditation. After some time it occurs to him that maybe this vijnan, that is higher knowledge, the intellect, that is the real me. And he comes and tells his father, I think I have understood the buddhi, the intellect, vijnan, my kosh, that must be me. His father says, very sorry, not not yet proceed further why are you not the intellect alone tell me aap bol sakte ho meri buddhi jo hai vahi main ho why are you not that because sometimes your buddhi is dull dim sometimes it's just flashing it also has all kinds of stages and secondly it's an again an object of your perception. You can sharpen, you can hone your buddhi or you can reduce it to some dull inert matter. So you cannot be that. Again the meditation continued. Finally he came to the idea, anandam brahmeti vijanat, ananda deva kalvimani bhutani jayante anandena jatani jivanti anandam prayanty abhisam vishanti ti which means the causal sheath, the sheath of, it is called bliss sheath only, the sheath of bliss, that must be me. So he goes and tells his father that I think it is from this that everything is emerging in which everything is sustained, into which everything everything dissolves so tell me is this really me and Varuna said you have come to the point this is the sheet that first covers the Atman through it streams out the all the power and consciousness and the bliss of the Atman that is lent borrowed by the mind then by the body and that is how the whole system becomes conscious. So you are this Anand you are very close now to the truth of the Atman and finally Bhrigu was able to penetrate through this Anandmaikosh again through meditation and he realized himself to be the self that very consciousness which is manifested through this body and mind is what you are Saisha Bhargavi Varuni Vidya Parame Vyoman Pratishtita these are very great words where is this Vidya established where is this knowledge established it is established in the cavity of your heart what does he mean to say you see you think you are in this body isn't it so there must be a locus for the essential aspect of your personality which is the Atman there must be a locus to you a locale a point that point is what is called the heart Hridayam itself means Hridayayam, the center of your personality paradigm. So that is where the Atman is to be found. Agar aap sadhan bhajan karoge thoda sa, you are immediately, your preceptors will tell you concentrate on the heart center. Agar aap waha concentrate karoge, concentration will be firm, you will be able to control your mind perfectly there and it develops an inward look, a kind of inward turned vision, it develops if it is committed, if your vital energy and mind is committed to the heart, heart center. So this is a kind of, it is not mystical but it is a very sacred technique being given to you. You can demystify this entire process if you apply it to yourself, ye objective model nahi dera hai, aapko khud karna hai, you ask me for meditation technique this is a very powerful meditation technique, who am I truly, ask this question and penetrate into yourself, you will come to an understanding that I am indeed consciousness functioning through all of this, the unchanging part of me is what? It's consciousness. The rest is changing, but I'm functioning through it. So dekhiya aapke identity ka parichay hai ye. This is the real you. And what is the result of getting this knowledge? That is also given in this Upanishad in the Bhrigu Valli. Annavan anna do bhavati, mahan bhavati, prajaya, pasubhi, brahma varshasena, mahan kirtya. A person who gets this knowledge of the self, what happens to him? First of all your health will improve, physical health, mental health. Anna do bhavati means that. Why it will improve? Everything starts functioning harmoniously if it is associated with awareness. Aapko pata hai in alternative medicine they will tell you this that if the pranayika energy is blocked somewhere you will not have good health. If the mind has blocks you will not have good health. It is not just to do with the physical system. Health is a composite something. So at every level there must be harmony, there must be free flow of awareness and that is why first thing it will do is it will improve your physical health, it will improve your annavan annad bhavati, mahan bhavati. It will give you a great mind free of unnecessary blocks. It will give you a broad free mind due to which quality people will come to you. Praja exactly does not mean progeny, although that is one meaning. It also means the brahmacharis who used to come to those rishis. People of that caliber you can relate with. They will come to you, you can share your knowledge with them. Prajaya, pashu bhi, pashu, cattle was the measure of wealth in those days. So, wealth will come to you and you become great by your spiritual luster. That is what is meant by mahan bhavati, by your varchas, brahma varch virtues. You see a man of spirituality radiates a different kind of vibration altogether. It's a very positive vibration. That is what is called Brahma virtues. It gives a magnetic personality and also you are able to connect with the greatest minds. This is how these Rishis were and that is why you find the the module of self-knowledge which they give you the understanding of self-knowledge it is so profound. Yeh dekhi kis philosophy mein aapka parichayi is tarah se diya gaya hai. This is the real understanding of you who you are. This is what Bhrigu Valli is about it is actually separating the five koshas and understanding the core of your personality paradigm through this method penetrating through the five koshas. So this is the knowledge which Varuna gives to Bhrigu and he attains to self-realization. Now the whole thing which they are telling is the consciousness is at the center of your personality structure that is the real you. You know consciousness is being studied by science also. Let me come a little into science. Do you know how it is being studied? Apne consciousness studies ke baare mein suna hai? It is a subject in many universities especially in the US. It is being studied in many universities, especially in the US. It is being studied in a big way since two decades. Because you see, just like there is matter-matter interaction, there is also mind-matter interaction, isn't it? And this is something very important for us to know. When mind interacts with matter, what is the output? What do you get out of it? Many branches of science have to do with mind matter interaction. How is science studying consciousness? They say consciousness is an emergent property of your brain. Emergent property ka kya matlab hai? Yes, it's a resulting property of your brain. It's a epiphenomenon, a kind of by-product of your brain. Yeh kya sach ho sakta hai? Or is it that your brain is functioning due to the presence of consciousness? You see, now these are two branches of knowledge. One branch is telling you consciousness is an epiphenomenon of the brain, of matter. Another branch is telling you matter functions due to the presence of consciousness. You can know the truth about this again if you analyze all forms of systems matter-matter interaction as I told you mind-matter interaction. Now the greatest jolt to science came in the form of the observer effect you know in in 20th century early years of 20th century, it was found that this mind matter interaction, the observer effect occurs there that the consciousness of the observer, it plays a major role in any act of perception. In fact, you can say consciousness orchestrates events in time and space. So, this is something unacceptable to science. Why? Because the predictability factor goes, is not it? In all classical systems, what is your Newtonian mechanics? In all classical systems, there is the factor of predictability. If I know the initial conditions, I through a set of equations, I can predict the course of events. I can know the result when consciousness comes into play whatever you mean by that consciousness in the West it is understood as mind in Vedanta it is understood as something separate from mind whatever you mean by that if consciousness comes into play the predictability factor vanishes from predictability you are going to possibilities from possibility you are going to probability. Once probability factor comes in, once probability factor comes in, how can you call it a science? You do not know what will happen. In fact, quantum mechanics will tell you that, that it is the final result of any event is a series of probabilities, a number of probabilities. It is a probability wave function that you arrive at. So, ap kaise solve kare is problem ko? You see it is a huge problem for science. The question boils down to has matter independent existence or not or is my mind, my consciousness determining the status, the independent status of matter. Does it in any way affect matter or not or has matter completely independent status so that it is an object? The subject is studying the object. Tell me now, what can be the truth? According to Vedanta, matter as such has no independent existence. Now I will give you a string of arguments based on this. Lekin aapko bahut dhyan dena hai otherwise again you will miss the logic. If you miss the logic you miss the beauty of Vedanta. It is based on very logical thinking. Sit straight all of you. Kyuki isko pakadne ke liye bahut concentration chahiye. Yes. Sit straight. Now listen to this. What are we trying to probe into? Has matter independent existence apart from consciousness or not? This is what we are trying to probe into. The first point which I will tell you is whenever you encounter an object, any matter, what is happening? That object is available as that object to your senses. You are creating the knowledge situation for that object. Analyze your existential experience. This is an object because my senses tell me so, which means what? Given this equipment, this is this particular object. Suppose I had extra equipment, suppose I had not just these 5 senses which are telling me this is a pen, suppose I had an extra sense, a UV radiation I was able to catch, this would appear as something different. Please see this. If suppose I had infrared radiation sensitivity, it would appear as something different. Please see this. If suppose I had infrared radiation sensitivity, it would appear as something else which means what given the equipment that I am laden with this appears as a pen. If I was given extra equipment, the object will change. First point. I will ask you every time only if you agree I will proceed. If you do not agree I will not proceed with the logic. This is the first point which means what an object is determined by you. You are creating is an object in your awareness. This is an object to your awareness. Always the situation is not that it is just an object. In your awareness, it is appearing as this object. Apart from your awareness, you do not know what it is. Apart from your awareness you will not know what the object is which means what every object is inextricably linked to your awareness. Apart from my awareness you mean this object is not there I am not saying that. If I move out of this room, this object will continue to be there, but in human awareness this is a pen. It is always in next to your experience of this object is inextricably linked to your awareness. Now, if this is an object only in my awareness, then it is dependent upon my awareness to be a pen. How? When do you say two objects are independent? Tell me. Let us take this paper. This paper and this pen, how do I say these two are independent things? If I remove this, this remains over. Then it is independent of this, is not it? If I remove this, this remains over. So, they are two independent objects. Now, if something is dependent upon my awareness to be that particular thing, can I give it independent status? So, you see no object is independent of your awareness for it to become perceptible as that object. So, no object is apart from your awareness. If two objects cannot remain independent of each other, they are not two different objects, but one object in two forms. So, the object what you are calling the object is nothing, but an appearance in the subject, an appearance in your consciousness. This is what the logic leads to the field of your experience is only one there's only one consciousness there are appearances of objects in that consciousness yes that is the definition of an object you are seeing as much of reality as your equipment will allow you to see. First point. Second point is an object is an object in your awareness. Always apart from your awareness you do not know what exists. Even if I move out of this room in your awareness this is a pen. In human awareness only you can call this a pen or I can call this a table. Take any object. You know for an ant moving there is this a table, take any object, you know for an ant moving there, is this a table? An ant, suppose it is moving there, this is a mountain for that ant, not just in terms of perspective, in terms of perception. For a bird flying there, this is a speck, to your awareness this is a table. So object is defined by what what my perception of it, it is that object in my awareness. So, awareness and object are inextricably linked you can never separate object from your awareness. If two substances depend on each other for their existence you cannot say they are two independently existing objects, they are one thing in two forms this is the logic appearing in two forms so all objects are appearances in your consciousness understand that's why existential experience this is how you are seeing objects all the time this is how you are seeing objects all the time this is how you are seeing the world of manifestation the world of plurality all the time the field of your experience is only one consciousness you divide it into subject and object then you add on that object with name form function this that get attached to it you forget about the subject then you are confused as to how to understand the reality about the object this is what Vedanta is telling you if you have to understand the object properly there must be subjective knowledge that is why because it is an object to you in your awareness Samajh mein aa raha hai? e kitna samajh mein aa yaa? aapko? are there any doubts about it You have to circulate this again and again in your mind to be able to convince yourself of it. Why I am telling you? First time aapke liye introduction hua hai. Vedantic logic. Unless you think about it repeatedly, the connections will not be clear to you. So after you go back to your room, think about what has been said. They are recording it also, so it will be available to you also. Think about it and you will understand something very rational and scientific they are telling you. Yes, yes, very good. Sir, if there is an object, let us say a stone lying on Mars, which no human has ever seen, are you claiming that it does not exist? No, I am not claiming it does not exist. What is the object? it is a stone lying on Mars which no human has ever seen, are you claiming that it does not exist? No, I am not claiming it does not exist. What I am claiming is that it is a stone lying you will not know without some effort of your awareness on your part. What it is you will not know. But the object exists. Yes, you see the object as a particular thing is so only to your awareness. This is what we are telling you. The object as a, you do not know what it is actually. To my five senses it is a pen. Something exists, it becomes that particular object if it satisfies these conditions, it is available to your equipment and it is an object to your awareness. And the second question is somebody sees a dream can exist. In a dream. Does the dream can exist because that object is in somebody's awareness or somebody hallucinating? No, the difference between a dream thing is, dream mind functions within very small bounds. What is happening is the time factor is there. You see time, it does not transcend time. The dream is very temporary. But the dream can exist in somebody's awareness. Yes. Does that mean that, that is why from the standpoint of Advait Vedanta, waking state is nothing but a long drawn out dream. Because the effect of the dream falls on you, falls on the subject. Whether the dream is real or not, it is a matter of speculation. But the effect of the dream is real, is not it? If you see a tiger in your dream, you feel fear. The effect of the dream is real. In the real world also, in the waking state also, it is the effects that matter the subject. Are you getting the point? So think about it. Achi tara think karke next class you can come with your questions if you want, okay. There can be a lot of questions on this. It's a very important logic of Vedanta. Yes? A beginning is a long stretch dream. So, if we do some meditation or some tapasya in our dream for a long time, so will that have same effect? You cannot do it. You cannot do it in the dream because I told you the dream mind is very a long time. So, will that have same effect? You cannot do it. You cannot do it in the dream because I told you the dream mind is very limited in time. The dream will always be brief. Only the effect of the dream falls like, somewhat like the waking state on you. You get the point? So, you can actually, conscious effort can be applied only in the waking state the dream happens due to the subconscious mind you are not in charge at that time you see yogis they don't sleep and dream as we do. They have pockets of awareness even in dream. So for them it is possible. Agar aap awareness, if you culture it to such an extent that all the time the flicker of awareness is awake, you are always conscious in a very huge measure, then it is possible to stay awake even in dream and direct your dreams. You create pockets of even in dream and direct your dreams you create pockets of awareness in dream is called Samadhi nahi kehte hai, isko heightened awareness kehte hai it is possible that's why you can work on your awareness to see if the all this is true or not okay I I know people who really they do not dream or sleep as we do, unka awareness level itna high hai, there are pockets of awareness even in dream, they are sort of awake in dream. Sometimes they say that if you are too much aware during sleeping, so it is not good and we should have deep sleep. Yes. And sometimes they say that we should have deep sleep. Yes. And some say that we should be a bit aware even during dreams. No, no, no. See, the point is this. You must have an episode of deep sleep. There is no doubt about it. It gives deep restfulness to your, why? Your mind shuts down. That experience is required for you to have happiness, complete restfulness. What Vedanta is telling you is not that don't shut down your mind what it is telling you is if you close your mind in a state of yoga awareness reaches its peak if it is yogic through yoga if you just shut down your mind you will go into a sort of dreamy sleep you will go into tamas you understand it is talking of a complete meditation ke vina ye bati samajh mein nahi aate awareness can be heightened so that you get the result of sleep deep sleep if that becomes a so yogis don't need too much of sleep three four hours is more than enough for them we need a full course of sleep why mind? Mind activity is so much. My mind is not in our control. It's just going on day in and day out. So we need to put it to rest. Get a good sleep. So now let me proceed with yes, 2, three things we have to understand now. First of all is, you see, understand this concept and you will understand a lot of science and Vedanta. What is an Upadhi? Upadhi is actually a technical word used in Vedanta philosophy to describe how the absolute becomes the relative. And how is it described. You see for example, water. This is the example given here. If you mix tea granules in water, you get tea. If you mix mud, you get muddy water. If you mix the river bed of Ganges, you get holy water. If you mix garbage debris, you get dirty water. If you mix tomato and spices, you get soup. Lemon and sugar, lemonade. Sunlight, you get dirty water. If you mix tomato and spices, you get soup, lemon and sugar, lemonade, sunlight, you get a rainbow. Now, this, the admixture is what is called Upadi. It is a superimposed limiting adjunct on any form of reality. It will give you definite effects. In Vedanta, they say, on the Atman, if you impose Upadi, it will give you plural effects. In Vedanta they say in on the Atman if you impose Upadhis it will give you plurality. It will give you well whatever is put there tea, muddy water, good water, holy water or dirty water whatever. That is the function of Upadhi. Now you see the difference is superimposed. Give all the beauty and color of life like for example, color, taste, value, flavor, viscosity, beauty, it is all due to upadhis. Now if you apply the same thing to yourself, you are that consciousness itself due to your upadhis, you appear to be this particular entity, this particular individual who is the son of so and so, whose home is at some particular place, who is studying in IIT, who will have these qualifications shortly, who will be taking up a job here. Did you understand? You become this kind of a functional entity in this world due to your upadhis. Now upadhi from the standpoint of plurality, it is a gain, it's your qualifications, it's to do with a gain in your individuality, but from the standpoint of who you truly are, it's a limiting adjunct. Samaj mein aara hai aapko? To understand this concept of upadhi because when we study superimposition, adhyas, you will need this concept. It works both in science and in Vedanta. It is this, due to this Upadhi that the absolute appears to be the relative. Now let us go into the technology of happiness. How is it being studied today? See these concepts are going to matter to you a lot because you will keep hearing them as you grow up. How is, what is the present understanding of happiness? going to matter to you a lot because you will keep hearing them as you grow up. What is the present understanding of happiness? You see, happiness depends upon three factors. This is how it is being studied today in positive psychology and also other branches. First of all, 50% of your happiness is supposed to be genetic according to them. So you have no hold over it. We will analyze this. And then almost 40% is based on your response. This is well quite acceptable, is not it? Your responses decide your level of happiness. And about 10% is due to your circumstances in life. This also you have no hold over. Now you see genetic causes for your unhappiness. How? genetic causes for your unhappiness how well there is a lot of truth in this because what actually enters your genes it determines a lot of your behavior it determines a lot of your experiences even if you are in a very good environment if the predisposition is towards frustration or depression then well it takes a lot of therapy and a lot of effort to bring you out of that. But what gets into your genes is something you can control. This is what the yogic sciences are about. Anything intensely done or felt or thought has the ability to create deep level sanskars in you. These translate physically and neuro physiologically into your genetic level. Your behavior will be based on this. So you see a large part just as I told you neuroplasticity a large part of it is through your mind isn't it? The convolutions of your brain, the neural circuits of your brain are created by the thoughts in your mind. So also what goes into your genes, if you have really worked hard on building your mind, building a great character, the effect will remain on the genes it becomes part of you even physically don't think this is a separate instrument it is your instrument the body what you intensely do with your mind will leave its mark here the two are connected in a very deep way you know even medical science tells you this today you have heard of psychosomatic diseases yes what are they? effects on the body due to mind and most of in most illnesses are psychosomatic in nature. So, do not underestimate the power of mind as I am at can I go 50% I have no hold and the next 10% also I have no hold somehow I will manage with the responses no you can get a fairly good hold over your happiness levels if you actually work on yourself a subjective knowledge aaj aapko nahi milta isliye you are constantly giving credit and responsibility and everything to the object. I swallow a pill and I will be happy. I can't work on myself that's too terrible. Main kaun hoon yehi pata nahi hai. So this situation should change a little. Samajh mein aa raha hai aapko? How important subjective knowledge is? Kyun yeh course aapke liye introduce kiya hua hai? You see this is a big leap of IIT. Why have they introduced? So that you you know yourself better, you can handle your situations better, you can control your own mind better, you will be successful anywhere. Success is a matter of time, that is all, if you are in charge of yourself. Otherwise success depends on various people, various factors, on your boss, on this and that, over which you have no control. So remember this, the second thing which determines your happiness is your emotional level. Aapka IQ bahut high hai but I am not sure of your EQ. Aapne ye mehsoos kiya hai kabhi? Emotionally, emotional intelligence level can be quite low in very many very intelligent children. Why? Why? Why is this due to? Because how my emotions are going on I have no idea, I cannot handle them and they are too terrible, they have lot of energy, they just sweep me off. Aise hi mujhe anger hota hai, I find hatred, I find myself going into depression, negativity and I need psychotherapy constantly, I need counselling. So if this is the situation, your IQ also will leave you after some time, please see this, all the various intelligence is a multi-dimensional something, your various types of intelligences are linked, if emotionally you are not balanced and harmonized, do not think your intelligence will remain very high. Emotional intelligence is the ability to harmonize and balance your emotions and extract their power for useful purposes. So, I will tell you some simple techniques here, pay attention because this is important for your life, how do I keep my emotional balance, first of all I will consciously try to cultivate positive noble emotions in my mind, consciously, whenever I feel the well anger is coming into me or stress I am getting overstressed or anxiety or hatred, I will check myself, not try to fix the outside, not shout at my friend who's trying to get me angry, I will check, put a check on my own mind or my own emotion and what else will I do? I will deliberately encourage positive emotions like kindnessने, केर, प्रतिण, प्रतिण यही तो आपके एसाइनमेंट्स हैं जब प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प्रतिण आपके प् level, which will give sanity to your emotion, which will give balance to your emotional life. What are the two things? Respect and devotion. A relationship which does not have these two factors will turn poisonous at the end. It will not give you satisfaction or fulfillment. Any relationship you want to go into, see that these two elements are there it will put keep at your your positive emotion will remain blooming and negative emotion will be kept in check emotion is meant to ennoble life lift your life to a higher level is emotion kedwara devata be bansakta a basur be bansakta so how you handle it that will determine the course of your life it is a tremendous energy potential emotion is nothing but thought with enormous vital energy and with feeling a thought of feeling with enormous vital energy so make sure you commit it in a particular way so that your relationships are always very refined they are at a particular level. Make sure these two elements remain in every relationship, respect and devotion. Do not try to build anything beyond this and you will always be happy. In every relationship, these two factors should be there. So Bhagavad Gita gives you a very important idea on emotional intelligence. You see a lot of emotional intelligence books are there. Some of them will give you just nonsensical ideas about managing your emotions. The thing is, if you do not know how to handle your emotional energy and where to commit your emotional energy, it can just take you haywire this is what will happen so that the sequence is traced in the Bhagavad Gita chapter 2 shloka 62 later on you can reference see very important for you to understand this how do we go into anger and depression and frustration and all these negativities how do we go Lord Krishna is teaching Arjuna was taught what I say you follow the sequence you will understand its importance the higher the vision on pumps are sung as they show pajayate it all starts with dwelling on sense objects images in your mind well you got various kinds of images sung heart and jayate kama as you go on dwelling on all kinds of objects association attachment comes to them sangha means attachment sangha sangha sanjayate kama that leads to desire kama krodho bhi jayate from desire arises anger all your desires cannot be satisfied it will lead to anger krodha bhavati sammoha from that comes a kind of delusion in your mind you don't know what is right and wrong sammoha smriti vibhramaha you forget the sense of right and wrong confusion prevails in your mind smriti brahmsa buddhi nasho intelligence deserts you the loss of intelligence and buddhinashad pranashyati. If your intelligence deserts you, you will just, it's a moral death of a person because you don't know what is right and wrong, what is the right thing to do, what is the wrong thing to do. It all started with simply dwelling on objects as they came from the external world without discrimination, meditating on the wrong things. जब वे बाद ज़्याना जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जाने के लिए जा by all these emotions and all this that is why emotion also at your age should be under the will you know in Vedic age this first ashram student life was called as Brahmachari ashram so that your emotional level is you are in control of it you can achieve any goal that way and if you mess up with emotions you mess up with your life it is long term unhappiness that you manufacture for yourself. So take charge of your emotions. Aad se, commit yourself. My emotions will function at a particular level. I will not degrade them beyond that level. If you elevate them, you will see it will just flood your life with happiness. If you degrade them, aapko samajh mein nahi aayega, you go to the animal level. This is the difference. So, this is regarding technology of happiness. You see how it is being studied today. EQ and happiness, EQ levels, emotional quotient levels are going to decide the balance you are going to have even between work, family. If your work takes the main thing in your life, main place in your life, you can suffer stress and dissatisfaction. If your family life is affected, well you may be, if your family life takes the main place, it can be possible that you are happy, but then you are jobless also, because you have not given preference to the work. So how do you balance between these two is what developing a high emotional quotient is about Now here let me give you this very important concept HP axis. This is part of your syllabus It is important for you to understand It is important for you to understand because this determines your stress levels just keep your eyes on that picture and I will explain it to you what it is about. This HPA axis is called neuro physiologically how it is affecting you negative emotion stress, hypothalamic pituitary adrenal adrenal axis it is it is your central stress response system and it is a intertwining of your central nervous system and endocrine system. What happens is there is a hypothalamic release of corticotropin releasing factor called CRF which associates with corticotropin releasing hormone, it binds to CRF receptors on the anterior pituitary gland and generates what is called the adrenocorticotropic hormone ACTH that is released. That binds to receptors on the adrenal cortex and stimulates the adrenal release of cortisol. Cortisol increases your stress levels immediately that is the main stress hormone we had discussed earlier. So, this is how it is generated. Three of your systems are working together to generate that, neurophysiologically speaking. So then what happens, now both these ACTH and your cortisol levels, they increase with age. Isliye agar aapko, aapke stress par vash na ho, iska matlab aapke mann par vash na ho, इसलिए अगर आपके पर वश नहों हो, इसका मतलब आपके मन पर वश नहों हो, stress will only increase with age, stress levels. समझ में आ रहा है, this is how it works. And that is why restoring homeostasis to the HPA axis is the primary goal of integrative care. Antidepressants जो देते हैं for depression patients, it is based on this understanding. They are trying to regulate the HPA axis. So do not succumb to such stress levels that you need to be on drugs to be quiet. So understand that this HPA axis is actually involved in all mood disorders including anxiety disorder, bipolar disorder, insomnia, post traumatic stress disorder, depressive disorder, burnout, chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, irritable bowel syndrome, alcoholism. In all of this the medicine is based on regulating HPA axis that is why I am giving you this here. The HPA axis has a central role in regulating many homeostatic systems in your body and it integrates physical and psychosocial influences in order to allow an organism to adapt effectively to its environment and tap its resources and optimize survival. Ye hi hora hai body mein as a result of your emotional states now we will go the earlier slide I have already shown you so I will go into this four levels of happiness available to you now you see depending on your current understanding many a bar up to bullet a parma cab, the current theory of happiness in positive psychology. What is it? There are five factors, PARMA, positive emotion, E is engagement, R is relationships, M is meaning in life, A is achievement. These are the five factors. Based on this, they are studying the four levels of happiness. Isko dekho ab. The very first is immediate gratification level, that is pleasure and minimizing pain. The obligation here is to self alone, no desire for common or intrinsic or ultimate good and so there is lack of self worth, fear of tangible loss, harm, boredom, etc. The gratification is immediate but not worth having. This is the table I am giving you from positive psychology, from the psychological standpoint not from Vedanta. They have also arrived at the same thing. Such short term transitory happiness which reduces your self-worth, do not invest your entire energy into that. That is why that is not even there in Parma level. You see the second level is a better kind of joy which comes from personal achievement. The objective here is still ego centeredness better than and gaining advantage. Characteristics are promotion of self is primary. So so personal power, control and all these other things come in like for example, fear of failure, contempt, isolation, loneliness, cynicism, this is also short term happiness. The third level is contributive. The third level is the objective is to go beyond your limited ego and make an optimal positive difference for others. The principles here comes in love, community service, genuine affection, feeling for others, kindness, empathy, all this will help you build yourself. Decisions focus on greater good not on personal gain and this is long term gratification. This is actually been found at the experimental level. People who do things for others after sometime their mind experiences a lot of happiness, people who do things only for themselves go into depression. Why your understanding of yourself should change? If satisfaction of my body is the only understanding I have because my understanding of myself is only the body I will go into very low levels of happiness after some time frustration so you must understand this this is a psychological fact today the fourth level is ultimate good participating in giving and receiving ultimate meaning goodness ideas and love is really a manene pehle hi kaha idealistic life chahiye you must have a great goal before you that will solve all your problems I have something great to achieve I will not remain as a mediocre person I have great ideas in life if you are an idealistic person vivekananda kehate that if a man with an ideal commits a thousand mistakes, a man without an ideal will commit ten thousand. So it is important to have a great ideal in life, not just your degree, not just a great job, something beyond your personal self. You understand? That is a great ideal in life. Dr. Abdul Kalamji kehte the a small aim is a crime unto yourself. So, have a great goal in life you are fit for that you are meant for that. So, these are the four levels of happiness which psychology gives you. This is going to affect your workplace. You see your organization the full story of a full spectrum organization will be this. If you have the survival instinct, it will only work in the organization as financial viability. If you have good relationships, it will have you will have positive relationships in the community in your organization and it will support the organization's needs. If you have good self-esteem, it leads to high performance systems at your workplace, high quality output. If you have undergone this self-transformation, there will be ongoing improvement at your workplace. If you have internal cohesion, sense of purpose and strong internal community will come into the organization if you have making if you have made a difference in yourself it will lead to external collaboration and community involvement you see how it is connected is called Vyashti or Samashti in Vedanta if you have changed the Vyashti the individual aspect you will change the Samashti the collective aspect if you jump straight away to the collective without changing yourself you cannot make these changes. Easily a subjective knowledge is important. If you give yourself a service it will be service to humanity and societal contribution on the long run. You understand how the two are connected? Let us go to the next thing you see. This is also important for you to know a emotional intelligence translates neurophysiologically into self-directed neuroplasticity. Is not this true? If you develop emotional intelligence it will translate into your system as neuroplasticity the much required changes in your brain positive changes naturally will occur that is why all disciplines given to you which we have discussed so far whether you call it karma, yam, niyam, saiyam, sadbhav, vivek all this is meant to create the right neurocircuits patterning your circuits it is meant for that. Here let me give you one idea if you ask me well why be good? It's an important philosophical query, why should I be good? Do you think about it? Why should I be good at all? If being bad gives me more joy or pleasure immediately why should I be good it's a very good sign yes due to Vivek you may solve this question but the actual answer philosophical answer for this is according to yoga vedanta it is you can only control your mind if you're good your mind will be out of control if you don't observe the basic moral disciplines of life if your mind is out of control everything collapses you cannot build your life this is a simple answer that's why commit yourself to great ideas and a great life commit yourself to that. Yehi to samay hai, when you should decide this is how my life will be, this is how I am going to lead my life, no matter what my circumstances, what the influence is falling on me, what my work environment, I will so change the subject, I can handle everything and my life will be positive, it will be meant for a great ideal. Abhi se ye commitment kar lo. Now this is the last thing which I would like to dwell upon today. We have no time in this session to go into last time Yam Niyam le ke humne chhod diya tha, Ashtang Yoga. Aapko yaad hai? And we were supposed to cover Asana, Pranayama, Pratyahara and Dharana and Dhyana and samadhi. Today we don't have time for all of this but very briefly I will tell you a few important points asan kya cheez hoti hai? The next step after yama and niyama is asan. To be able to sit forgetting the body without body consciousness is asan. If you are able to forget your body in meditation your mind will rise very high. Agar yaha pain ho, waha pain ho, I am not able to forget, stomach is upset, this and that, you can't meditate. So asana is that posture which makes you forget your body. Pranayam is that technique of breathing which keeps the mind very calm so if your breath is regulated you are doing pranayam, you see when you're very restless breath also is very erratic when you're calm your breath is very regulated long drawn-out breathing so if you practice this you are practicing pranayam, simple technique I'm giving you. After that comes pratyahara which means withdrawal of mind. Gradually mind has to be brought out from distracting things and focus on the object of your meditation. If you are able to do that, you see this is the situation that will arise. I will just explain this slide and we will finish the class. You see, in your mind what is happening is due to objects there are various modifications your mind is undergoing. If the modifications are unstable and the object also that is the thought is shaking, it is just the ordinary mind, it is an unconcentrated mind. When do you call it a focused mind? If the vrittis are, which means the modifications of your mind are very stable and the pratyay the ordinary mind it is an unconcentrated mind when do you call it a focused mind if the vrittis are which means the modifications of your mind are very stable and the pratyay the thought you are thinking also is very stable it is similar then you will have a focused mind a concentrated very concentrated mind means you have stable vrittis and stable pratyays the mind is in a very stable state and a meditative mind means non fluctuating vrittis rising and falling at same point and prathet. I will demonstrate this to you in the next class, but just now this is just a theoretical portion you should know. If you can if you want to meditate you should manufacture the meditative mind. It is a state of mind again. Just like how happiness what is it? It is a state of mind. It is a, it is a not just a cognitive process, it is a cognitive effective process, happiness. Concentration meditation is a state of your mind again. So, mind control is required, mind management is required, studying mind is required to go into meditation. Ye hum continue karenge next class me, the way to generate a concentrated mind is in your hand, is the power of your attention. This also we will take up in the next class. It is 7.45, let us stop here.
 Om Asato Maa Sadgamaya Tamaso Maa Jyotir Gamaya Om Shanti Shanti Shanti Om Lead us from the unreal to the real Lead us from darkness unto light Om, peace, peace, peace. Namaste, everybody, and welcome back to another session of Meditation and Philosophy. Today, we are on home ground. At least, it's my home ground, and also home ground for most of us, because we're going to speak about Vedanta. I had mentioned, just to put it out there, that when I talked about Buddhist meditation, it's something that it is I'm not initiated into it, nor am I authorized to teach it. It's something that I have studied academically and also practiced a little bit myself. That's why I was teaching, but it's good to be clear there. I also made it clear that the Kashmir shave is a tradition, though it's part of the Hindu tradition, I still not, I'm not initiated into it. And there you really have to be initiated into those traditions to teach it. I have, I have, and I am only studying it academically under some very good teachers and also have practiced a little bit of it myself and that's what I shared. But the devotional tradition we talked about last time, that's very much part of our tradition and now we have come to the core of our own, my own tradition, our own tradition, which is Vedanta or Advaita Vedanta. So yes, I am authorized to teach. I am initiated. I am a monk of Vedanta and authorized, initiated to practice and teach. All right, so that's good. So what is Vedanta? Most of us already know this, so that's good. So what is Vedanta? Most of us already know this, but it's good to start by highlighting that. Vedanta nama upanishad pramana. Vedanta is the source of spiritual knowledge called the Upanishads. Upanishads, we know, are these texts, spiritual philosophical texts, which are found in the Vedas, which are the most ancient and the most fundamental religious texts of the Hindus. Perhaps the most ancient available record of spirituality, which is available to humanity at large. So in the Upanishads, we find what might be called the final teachings, the highest teachings of the Vedas. So in that sense Anta, when you say Veda Anta, the end of the Vedas literally does not mean the end of the Vedas because sometimes the Upanishads are found scattered in between the Vedic corpus. It means Anta in the sense of the final, the highest, the conclusion in Sanskrit Siddhanta, the final conclusion, the conclusive teachings of the Vedas and based on the Upanishads. So Upanishads basically the textual basis of Vedanta is the Upanishads. If you say what are the texts, what are you talking about? We're talking about Upanishads. But based on that there is the Bhagavad Gita, which is the essence of the Upanishadic teaching and in put in the form of a very practical spirituality taught by Krishna to Arjuna. The Gita does not claim to be anything original apart from the Upanishadic teaching and Shri Krishna is cognizant of that. Often he actually quotes directly from the Upanishads. So the Bhagavad Gita is part of the basic set of texts of Vedanta and then you have another text called the Brahma Sutras. So all systems of orthodox philosophy have a set of sutras which are aphoristic statements, very short cryptic Sanskrit sentences. The set of the sutras, it systematizes the entire knowledge. It's like a compressed zip file, you know, in a computer zip file you have a lot of information which is packed in. The sutras are like that. You have a whole system of philosophy of spiritual knowledge packed into a few short sentences. So you have the yoga sutras, for example, Patanjali's yoga. You have much more complex than all of these sutras. You have the Panini's grammar. much more complex than all of these sutras you have the Panini's grammar, Sanskrit grammar is based on a set of large set of sutras, but similarly you have the Vedanta sutras, Brahma sutras, Brahma sutras and Vedanta sutras are the same thing. They take up the teachings of the Upanishads and they reflect, they rethink and they try to systematize. But because they are Sutras, they are cryptic and so they are open to interpretation and they have been interpreted. In fact, they are in many ways open-ended. So they allow for multiple interpretations and they have been interpreted in different ways. And these interpretations of the Brahma Sutras which are based on the Upanishads, these interpretations of the Brahma Sutras which are based on the Upanishads. These interpretations of the Brahma Sutras are foundational for the various schools of Vedanta. So Vedanta is not just one school. There are multiple schools of Vedanta, multiple darshanas or philosophies which have come out of the Upanishads. Advaita Vedanta is based on Shankaracharya's commentary on the Vedanta Sutras. Vishishtadvaita Vedanta is based on Shankaracharya's commentary on the Vedanta Sutras. Vishishtadvaita Vedanta, the qualified monism of Ramanuja is based on Ramanuja's commentary on the Brahma Sutras. Dvaita Vedanta, dualistic Vedanta is based on Madhvacharya's commentary on the Brahma Sutras and you have Shuddhadvaita Vedanta of Vallabhacharya. You have the Dvaitadvaita Vedanta of Nimbarkacharya. You have the Achintya Bheda Veda of Baladeva Acharya which is the philosophical basis of you know in the United States people are very familiar the ISKCON, the Hare Krishna people. So they have their philosophical basis in one school of Vedanta called the Achaitya Veda. What we are going to talk about here is Advaita Vedanta. So I'm zooming in. I've given you the big picture. Now I'm zooming into the specifics of what we're going to do today, next time, and the time after that. Advaita Vedanta, which is one school of Vedanta, but quite distinct as we shall see, pretty unique in the whole spectrum of religion and philosophy and spirituality. Advaita Vedanta is pretty unique. All the other schools of Vedanta, they are basically dualistic and devotional. Ramanuja's Vishishtadvaita, Madhava's Dvaita Vedanta, Shuddhadvaita Vedanta, Dvaitadvaita Vedanta and of course, Deskhan, the Gauri Vaishnava, Achintya Veda, they are all devotional. They are all about God and devotion and worship and faith, beautiful systems, but they are basically, therefore, they are all theologies. They are reasoning based on certain assumptions about God and presuming faith. Advaita Vedanta is very different. It is pretty unique that way. So we're going to talk about Advaita Vedanta. One advantage of Advaita Vedanta is what it teaches can be said pretty simply. That's the title of today's talk. You might have seen Tat Tvam Asi, That Thou Art. So this is from the Chandogya Upanishad, one of the Upanishads in which the teacher who's the father tells the student who is his actually son that Thou Art, talks about the ultimate reality of the universe. And then finally tells the student, tells his son, you are that reality. Tat tvam asi. Tat means that. It's pretty close to the English that. Tvam means thou, you. You, my son, you, the individual being, and that the cosmic reality, you're actually one and the same reality. And this is supposed to be realized and this will solve all our problems. There are these two points here. All of these systems, I'm not just talking about Advaita Vedanta now. What we did in the last three classes, in fact, all of these philosophies, especially the philosophies coming out of India, they are all meant for realization. They're all meant for self-realization. As Vivekananda said, religion is realization. It's not believing in something or giving your assent to a doctrine, following a particular system or subscribing to, you know, I belong to this religion or this organization. No, it's about realization. I remember Swami Premesanandaji, who was a disciple of the Holy Mother, Ma Sharda, and in his own lifetime, he was regarded as an enlightened person, as a Jeevan Mukta Brahmagyani. His Sevak attendant for the last more than 10 years of his life was Swami Suhithanandaji, who is now the vice president of our order, Sanatan Maharaj. He was a young novice, a brahmachari at that time, of course, a long time ago in 1916. And I had the good fortune to start my monastic life and my early training under Swami Suhithanandaji. So he used to tell me stories about Swami Premeshananda. There was this other elderly gentleman in the ashram when I joined the ashram many, 26 years ago, Badal Babu, elderly gentleman, very devoted person. Now it seems, so he had, he was not a monk formerly, but he was very monk-like. He never went into householder life. He was a spiritual practitioner all his professional life. After retirement from his job, he stayed in the ashram. I'm talking about Badal Babu now. And so in his young days, he used to go to Swami Premesh Ananda when Swami Suhith Ananda was a young brahmachari at that time. So this is the story about those days 1960 or so. So Badal Babu had this tendency, you know, this interest in yogis and spiritual seekers and sadhus, monks, tantrics, and practitioners of different kinds. And he would go and visit them or read about them, and then come and tell Swami Prameshananda about it. You know, Swami, I met this person who has been practicing meditation in this way, or I read about this yogi who lived in a cave and he had these experiences and so on and so forth. One day, Swami Prameshananda said to him with a touch of pathos, you know, like a little bit of sorrow. I'll tell you in English and for those who understand Bengali, I'll tell you the original Bengali. What he said was, my dear boy, his name was Badal, but which means cloud in English, but affectionately he would call him Badla. So Badal, but just like a sort of play on the word Badla. He said, my dear boy Badla, look here. If the whole world were to turn into Ramakrishna, not only the whole world becomes spiritual, everybody becomes enlightened, not only enlightened, let everybody become an avatar, an incarnation of God. Ultimately, what is it to you or to me? If we do not realize it in our own lives, it's wonderful. The world will be transformed, and everybody will be extraordinary. All that's really good. But at the end of our lives, what does it really matter? What we have read, or whom we have met, or how wonderful they were. So in Bengali he said, What is it to you or what is it to me? The whole emphasis is on enlightenment. We must realize it. That's one reason why I really, really like this Advaitic approach. Because of all the approaches, this is the most direct. It is concerned solely with self-realization, with enlightenment. As soon as possible, as fast as possible, as directly and as powerfully as possible. As simply as possible. We'll see how. as powerfully as possible, as simply as possible. We'll see how. So this is one thing which I wanted to say, that it is all about self-realization. And the second thing I wanted to say was, just like, and remember, it's not just Advaita Vedanta, all the others, Kashmiri Shaivism, Buddhism, the devotional approach, they're all about self-realization. They're all about God realization. The other thing which I wanted to say was, all of these approaches, and especially the Advaitic approach, is about overcoming suffering and attainment of fulfillment. In Sanskrit, atyantika-dukkha-nivritti, paramananda-parapti. Complete cessation, transcendence, overcoming of suffering. I'm using the words very carefully. Transcendence of suffering. Transcendence of suffering does not mean an end to suffering. World will go on, the body will go on, COVID will come and go. So that will not be ended by Dvaita Vedanta. So transcendence, you are in the middle of it and yet you are not. So that is the goal. So transcendence, you are in the middle of it and yet you are not. So that is the goal. And fulfillment, lasting fulfillment, deep, lasting, profound fulfillment. So that's the goal of Advaita Vedanta. And it's also the goal of all those other systems as well. Okay. Having said that, Advaita Vedanta is very direct. I mean, I can go on singing praises of this system because I suppose I am a little bit, wee bit biased about it. So what does it say? That thou art, you are that. These sentences which express the central teaching of Advaita Vedanta, which is the identity of the individual and the ultimate reality. Jiva Brahma Ikyam, your identity, you are one with the ultimate reality. The sentences in the Upanishads which state this, these are called Mahavakyas, great pronouncements of great sentences. For example, Tat Tvamasi, that thou art. Aham Brahmasmi, I am Brahmanman means exactly the same thing. The teacher tells you that Thou art and you are not supposed to say that Thou art then you can just keep going back and forth between you and the teacher. You are supposed to realize I am that. Aham brahmasmi. Another so Aham brahma tattvamasi from Chandogya Upanishad. Aham brahmasmi is from the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad which is from the Yajur Veda. The Chandogya Upanishad, Aham Brahmahasmi is from the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, which is from the Yajur Veda. The Chandogya Upanishad is from the Sama Veda. And then there is I am Atma Brahma. This very self is Brahma. Again, it means the same thing. This very self, I am Brahman. So this very self is Brahman. This is from the Mandukya Upanishad, which is from the Atharva Upanishad, Atharva Veda. And then there is Prajnanam Brahma, this consciousness, the awareness which you feel, this is the ultimate reality. This is from the Aitareya Upanishad, which is from the Rig Veda. So from each of these Vedas, one statement has been taken from one of those Upanishads as a representative of Mahavakyas. But the Mahavakyas are many in number, such sentences are scattered across the Vedas, across the Upavakas are many in number. Such sentences are scattered across the Vedas, across the Upanishads and across the Vedas in fact. Okay. Another way in which the central teaching of the Advaita Vedanta can be put off quoted is Brahma Satyam Jagat Mithya Jiva Brahmhevan Aapar. Brahman alone is real. The world is an appearance. And you are none other than that ultimate reality, Brahman. As we go through the talk today, I hope by the end of the talk, I would like you to see that at least in our understanding, we get what it means. Something so radical and stunning as saying that you are that ultimate reality. You are the only reality of the world. The world is an appearance. What do these things even mean? How can they solve all my problems? How can they give me lasting fulfillment and peace? So this is the promise. At the end of today's talk, we will know this for sure. Now, if you do not, you have questions. Definitely, you're most welcome to ask questions. What I'm trying to say is it is understandable. It's not very difficult at all. And it's just the understanding of it, which we can have in the matter of an hour and a half, it is productive of great peace, a great lightness of being. It's a great, great, great relief just to hear this. In Sanskrit, there is a term, shavadamangalam, auspicious just to hear it. Swami Vivekananda said, the truth is a corrosive substance of infinite power. Hear it once. Even if you don't understand it, even if you don't agree with it, it will continue to work. If not in this lifetime, let's hope in this lifetime. I'm hoping in this class. But over time, it will work and it will have its way. And you will get the result. The result being overcoming suffering and attainment of peace. It will work, and it will have its way. And you will get the result, the result being overcoming suffering and attainment of peace. All right, big promise. As we go into it, what kind of journey are we undertaking? I've said this on other occasions, but you have to listen carefully. What kind of journey are we undertaking? What is this Advaita Vedanta, and what is it not? One way is this Advaita Vedanta and what is it not? One way of understanding Advaita Vedanta is to understand what it is not. So listen carefully. One is this journey, it's not a physical journey. It's not a journey which is some kind of physical astral journey from earth to heaven. you go to Vaikuntha, the abode of Vishnu, or Kailasha, the abode of Shiva, the Christian or Islamic heaven. No, we are not talking about going to a place. It's not a journey from here to there. It's not a journey through space. It's not a journey from one place to another place, from a not so good place to a much better place. I'm not saying those things are not possible, but it's not about that. It's not a journey from one place to another. Because that reality we're talking about here, that ultimate reality, is not only there in whatever great place you can think about, it's also here, equally here. So there's no point of going from one place to another. Which part of the ocean will you go to to find water? You say what a silly question Swami, wherever you are in the ocean there's water. If it's ocean, it's water. So it's like that. The ultimate reality is available right here. It's available everywhere and it's available right here, right here. You don't have to go anywhere. Then it's not a journey in time. Journey in time means from now to then. When? The coming of the Messiah, or the coming of the next avatar. And we had this monk, Sri Ramakrishna had said he would come again. And he had left some clues. So the coming of the incarnation is a great, great big event in spiritual life. So we had a monk, very great before my time, Jagadeeshwaranji, I have read his books, very scholarly and saintly monk from what I've heard those who have met him, but he got this bee in his bonnet, a holy bee in his bonnet, about when is Sri Ramakrishna going to come next? And so he pursued that till the end of his life. The coming of the incarnation, coming of the Messiah or after I go to after death then only I will be free, then only I'll be free after death. There are many many philosophies and theologies which believe that, that only perfection is possible after death. How can you be perfect here? How can you be fully transcend sorrow here in this miserable place in this body? No, Vedanta says, Advaita Vedanta says, it's not a journey from now to then, you know, after death or after the coming of the incarnation, after going, after something will happen, not after see after is a time word. But the reality we are talking about is it transcends time. It is timeless. What is there then afterwards is also now. It is all the time. At what time will you find the ultimate reality? At all times. If it is available at all times, then it's available now. It will be available in a better form, more distilled form. Now it is too short, and then it will be a one-shot vaccine later on. Then, no. It is always equally good available right now, right here, right now. It is also not a journey from one object to another. It's something to be understood. Mostly in religion, we're seeking an object, though we don't use that language. But it could be God. It could be an experience, a samadhi, a burst of light, or a beautiful mystical experience, meeting God who is not me, something else, some other reality called God. I love that story about Ramana Maharshi, where somebody goes to Ramana Maharshi and says that your method of inquiry, who am I? I love that. But I like that, but I don't really, it's not really my way. I am devoted to Narayana, to the Lord Narayana. Is it all right? And Ramana Maharshi said, yes. Oh, it's all right. Yes, it's all right. Then after death, will I go to the abode of God, to Vaikuntha, to the abode of Narayana? And Ramana Maharshi said, yes. Oh, I'll go to Vaikuntha to the abode of Narayana and Ramana Maharshi said yes. Oh, I'll go to Vaikuntha. Yes. And will I see Narayana there? Will I see God after death in heaven? Ramana Maharshi said yes. Oh, really? I will see Narayana. Yes. And will Narayana look at me? Will God see me? And Ramana Maharshi said, yes, yes. Will God speak to me? Yes. Oh, Narayana will speak to me. Yes, yes. And what will he say to me? He will say, find out who you are. Who am I? Find that out. So I love that story. It is not a journey from one object to another from you to something else. It may be God, it may be incarnation, it may be Buddha, Ramakrishna, Jesus, Krishna, Rama, Narayana, Devi, Durga. It's we're not talking about that. It is not even a new kind of experience. All extraordinary, we are not denying that, all those extraordinary, beautiful, mystical experiences are possible. Visions of gods and goddesses are possible, but we are not talking about that. At this point somebody may say, well then I've lost interest because I am interested in that experience. I want to see Narayan or see God. No, you should not lose interest because what we're going to talk about is the very foundation of that experience. It is there in this worldly experience we are having now. It is there in the depths of meditation. It is there in the heights of mystical experience also. It is one experience. It is the essence of all experiences. If you understand what we are going to talk about, you will see no mystical experience, no Samadhi is higher than what we are going to talk about. If you understand what we are going to talk about today, you will see that no vision of gods or goddesses, no mystical experience, no samadhi is valuable in itself. They're all meant to bring you to this. This is the purpose of all those practices. So it's not a journey in space. It's not a journey in time. It's not a journey from one thing to another thing, not even from one type of experience to another type of experience. Then what is it? What kind of a spiritual journey is it? It's a journey from ignorance to knowledge. In Sanskrit, avidya to vidya, from ajnana to jnana, from not knowing, not realizing, to knowing and realizing. That's the journey. And that journey is accomplished by what we will do today. What is it not? Advaita is a path of knowledge, from ignorance to knowledge, by which I mean I am speaking to people who are mature, so you will not misunderstand. It is the path of knowledge by which I mean it's not a path of bhakti, devotion. It is not a path of yoga, meditation. It is not a path of karma, action. Immediately let me take it all back, that karma, yoga, bhakti, action, devotion, meditation all have their place. Yes, indeed in Advaita Vedanta also they have their place. They are essential, but I will be cheating you if I do not distinguish what I'm going to talk about today from those paths. Those are the paths you have already seen. The other three sessions, Buddhism is par excellence a path of meditation. Yesterday, the last class was a path of devotion and Kashmiri Shaivism is a very wonderful mix of mysticism and devotion meditation. of mysticism and devotion meditation. But this is different. It's different. It's not yoga. It's not karma. It's not bhakti. We must understand Advaita in its own light. And then we can integrate. We can integrate it back. We will see what role other things have to play. But we must understand it in its own glory. And it is a glory. It's an amazing thing. All right, I have sold it enough. Oh, I also said it's not a path of action. This is something that Shankaracharya goes to great extent to distinguish. The reason is because he is distinguishing it from the Purvam Imamsa, the ritualistic portion of the Vedas, which is full of ritual action, ritualistic action, but action nevertheless, chanting and meditations and actual physical rituals. And he wants to distinguish the Upanishads, Advaita Vedanta from that. So he says the Atman, the ultimate reality, which we are going to talk about is not accomplished through action. What can you do through action? He says Apya, Utpadya, Vikarya, Samskarya. Apya means attain. Something which is not attained you can attain through action. You are here and you want to go to the next village. You can take the village pathways and go there. That's attaining something which is not yet attained. But you can't do that to the Atman, because as we said, it's everywhere, where do you go? It is always, it is you, what will you do to, it's like saying, so what will you do to attain yourself? You're already yourself. Similarly, Utpadya, it can't be produced. The ultimate reality is not something that is to be produced. And this sounds simplistic, but you can see if you relate it to the history of philosophy, the whole of Hegelian evolution from the prevail absolute to the evolved, final evolved state of the absolute. So it is something to be evolved through evolved state of the absolute. So it is something to be evolved through the process of dialectics and reaching a state of excellence. Advaita Vedanta says absolutely not. That's not what we're talking about. It's not something to be produced like you produced grain in a field. You can't produce the absolute. It is not something to be to be modified or changed. Just like milk is modified into yogurt. You can't modify the individual being into the ultimate reality. It's not possible unless you are already that ultimate reality. You're not talking about converting the human into the divine. You can't convert. If your reality is actually human, you will remain human. You will remain a creature. You will not, it's, you are not God. And then it's samskarya. Samskarya means refinement, improvement. Can we improve? Are we talking about improving ourselves, becoming better people, better beings until we become God-like? Not at all. Not at all. What improvements will you make to into to say the image of a golden mouse to turn it into gold? You can improve it, you can melt it and change it and make it into a golden Ganesha. This is a reference to Ganesha and Ganesha has a mouse you know in the imagery. So the mouse is a mouse and Ganesha is God mouse in the imagery. So the mouse is a mouse and Ganesha is God. So to turn the mouse into God, you would have to melt the mouse form and put it into a Ganesha form, all that you can do. But if I ask you the golden mouse, to what refinement do you have to make into the mouse to make it gold? Nothing, it is gold. So the ultimate reality is there, You don't have to refine yourself into that ultimate reality. So karma, karma can only do these things, produce something, attain something, change something, refine something. None of these are applicable to the ultimate reality which you already are. So karma is not involved here at all. Action, change is not involved here. Okay. I still haven't started, but I think we have got a solid foundation to build upon. What is the process now? What is the process of Advaita Vedanta? Every path is a process. So in meditation, you're taught how to sit, how to breathe, and how to visualize. In devotion, you are taught how to sit, how to breathe and how to visualize. In devotion you are taught about God and the glories of God and how you can have faith and devotion in God. In ritualistic worship you are taught something and so on. So what is the process here? The process here is hearing, reflection and meditation. Shravanam mananam nididhyasana. In the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad it's there. Atmavare drashtavya. The self is to be realized, is to be seen. How do you see the self, the real self? You have to hear about it, you have to reason upon it, and you have to meditate upon it. Shravanam mananam nididhyasana. Hearing literally does not mean only hearing, it means systematically studying. Studying what? All these texts are available. That's why it's there. You hear it again and again. You hear means you are taught it. It's not just like hearing music. You have to engage your all your faculties. You have to like really put effort into trying to understand what is being taught. The Upanishads are there, the Bhagavad Gita and Brahma Sutras of course there, but so many texts and so many masters today is not only the original Sanskrit text but also in other languages now in English. So many texts are there which give you this central teaching. There is Aparoksha Anubhuti, there is Drigdrishya Viveka, there is Vakya Vritti, Vivek Churamani, Vedanta Sar, so many, many, many texts, but they all teach you the same thing. That's the beauty of them in various different ways. So you won't be bored in different ways. The Shravanam must continue hearing this again and again, being taught it, listening to this, nothing new, not one thing will be new. When I said that thou art at the end of this class also I'll just say the same thing that thou art, but we'll understand it much more clearly, we'll see what is meant. So Shravana, systematically studying, literally hearing but systematically studying. And by the way before this a lot of preparation has to be gone through that's where the role of, you know, when I said action is not to be discarded, karma is useful, devotion is useful, meditation is useful, all those are useful as preliminaries, as preparations to come to this stage of shravana. So those will go on. It's not that you finish those first and then come to Vedanta class. No, those will go on in our lives. We will lead ethical lives. We will have devotional practices. We will meditate. So altruistic, ethical action in our lives, devotion, surrender to God, and regular practice of meditation and focus, these are like a solid foundation for Vedanta, for Vedanta Shravana. Shravana means hearing. It's a name in India. I recently one of the professor who's joined Harvard a few months ago, her name is Shravana, so a very Vedantic name. So once you go through Shravana, what do you get? You get a clarity about what these texts are. The specific purpose of Shravana is to remove doubt about, it's a pramana samshaya. That means doubts about the source of knowledge, the text. What is Vedanta teaching me? If you go through this Shravana once, twice, thrice, you have no more doubts. I know what it is teaching me. Then what remains? I know what the texts are telling me. I know what the teachers are telling me, but I have many doubts. I don't get it. Then you go to the second stage, Manana. Again, these go on parallelly. Then you go to the second stage, manana. Again, these go on parallelly. Today you'll have shravana, you'll also have manana. You have many questions about every aspect of spiritual life, and especially about Advaitic teachings. So those questions, which are doubts, is it possible? How is it that I am not a body? How is it that I'm not a person? What is this nature of consciousness, existence, what you're talking about? Is there at all such a thing? Aren't they abstractions? All these questions and details, every minute detail you can examine, you ask, you're supposed to understand. See, here is something interesting. Let me put it this way. Devotion is accomplished through the heart. By heart I mean desire and love and passion. All our love, passion, desire for the world is collected and poured to God in faith and adoration. That's how bhakti works. That's how devotion works. It works, it's based on the heart. I mean, I'm not saying that there won't be action, they won't be thinking, there won't be other things, but mainly it's based on the heart. It depends on channelization, sublimation of your emotions. Meditation. It's based on the mind. All other things are there. The body has to be stable. The desires have to be quietened, but it's the mind. All other things are there. The body has to be stable, the desires have to be quietened, but it's the mind which has to focus. The mind which is a series of thoughts about scattered things, it has to be brought under focus into awareness, into calmness. So meditation is mind based, devotion is heart based. Karma, whether ritualistic karma or actually action in the world is will-based, is based on the will. I will use my body mind to do this. So that is action. Vedanta, Advaita Vedanta is based on the understanding, intellect, buddhi. It is our understanding, the faculty, the highest faculty that we have, our entire worldview, our entire understanding of what's going on here, that has to be changed. So to understanding means you need to ask questions. The second thing, shravana manana, which is asking questions and having clarity, you must think. If you cannot love, you cannot be a devotee. If you cannot work for the welfare of others, you can't be a karma yogi. If you can't focus, sit down and focus, you can't be a meditator. If you can't reason, if you refuse to think, Advaita Vedanta won't work for you. Must think. So, manana. It is the way of the philosopher. I'm again, I'm careful. Philosopher, I don't mean you have to sign up for a philosophy course. Often that's more harmful than useful. Or not that you have to read all philosophy books, but philosopher means in the sense of thinking. And then meditation. So after this stage of manana, what have you got? You have got, I now know, I not only know what the texts are telling me, I understand it. It's clear to me, I am convinced. First one, I know the teaching, telling me, I understand it. It's clear to me, I am convinced. First one, I know the teaching, but I don't understand it. I'm not clear about it, I'm not convinced about it. After reasoning, I know the teaching, now I'm clear about it, I'm convinced, I'm sold, I got it. But then what's the problem now? One more problem remains, but still not a living thing for me. I still feel a living thing for me. I still feel more or less the same. And the promise was, I'll go beyond suffering, I will attain fulfillment. That's not quite, I'm not quite there. I get it now what you're pointing me towards, but it's not a full blown reality in my life yet. The promises have not been fulfilled. So for that, what you have learned, what you have understood, what you are now you have understood, what you have got clarity upon, you bear down on that, you settle down, you soak it in, in meditative processes, intensely sit with what you have got understood, the clarity, the conviction. Those are meditative processes, those we will see in next session and the session after that. So you can see the meditative processes called Nididhyasana, they are Advaitic non-dual meditation, specialized meditation techniques. They will work only if you understand and you will understand only if you listen. So Shravana, Manana, Nididhyasana, you can't in Vedanta, you cannot jump to the meditation. In Buddhism you can jump to the meditation, but in Vedanta you can't jump to the meditation. In Buddhism you can jump to the meditation, but in Vedanta you can't jump to the meditation. You have to understand, in Advaita Vedanta. It's like you think deeply about what you learned in class. Oh, so thinking deeply is important. I will not go to class, but then what do you think deeply about? All right, still haven't started. Now we know Shravanamanaana nididhyasana. This is the core practice. All other practices are there. We are not denying the role of karma yoga, bhakti yoga, and raja yoga meditation. They're all supporting. But the core practice is jnana yoga. What is jnana yoga? Shavana manana nididhyasana. Systematically studying Vedanta, reasoning it through till you get conviction and clarity, and finally meditating upon your absolute clarity and conviction till it becomes a living reality for you, which Swami Vivekananda called assimilating this knowledge. He says, till it tingles with every drop of your blood, I am that. Soham, I am he. I am that. OK. Now, the core of Advait, I am that, so I am he, I am that. Okay. Now the core of Advaita Vedanta itself, the teaching, I will go through very fast, but then we'll keep coming back to it. It is this, we do not know what we are. We think the moment we are asked what we are, we don't think about it. But if you are asked, our first reaction is, oh, I am this thing here. What do you mean by this thing? Body. Well, yes, body and the mind, body, mind, I guess that's it. The person, this person. I am this person. I'm Swami Sarva Prananda. Who else would I be? This instinctive identification with the body and mind. Are you all these things around you? No, no, no, absolutely not. They are other things. Are you all these people? Of course not. They are others. They are people. I am the subject. These are all object. I am a person. They are all persons. And there are living beings, and there are non-living things. This world view about myself and the world, this Advaita Vedanta says is dramatically mistaken. And this is the cause of all our problems. Luckily the good news is it can be corrected, I won't say easy, well yes let me say easily, it can be corrected pretty easily. easily. The insight, the breakthrough, it's a pretty flimsy layer of a veil of illusion which separates us from the truth about ourselves. As Vivekananda used to say, if only you knew what you truly are, if only you knew the truth about yourselves. So what is that truth about ourselves that we have to see? Advaita Vedanta insists that thou art, you are Brahman. It basically says, you are this unlimited awareness, immortal awareness right now. And you can discover it. And you can stabilize yourself in that awareness. And you can live like that. And that solves your problem. How do you do that? Very quickly. I have mentioned these methods, and you will see in many of my talks and in many of the books, these methods are scattered. But quickly, three ways, any one of which we'll do. We will see these ways next time and time after that. One way is the pancha kosha. Another way is the avasthat pancha kosha, five sheets of the human personality. Another one is the avasthatraya, the three states of our waking, dreaming, deep sleep. A more basic way is drig drishya, subject object, knower and known, seer and seen. And these I've talked about extensively. What is done is, for example, I'll quickly lead you through all three, and you will see they all lead to the same thing. Dhrigya-riksha. So now when I talk about it, you'll have to do three things corresponding to hearing, reasoning, and meditation. First, corresponding to hearing is, what did he say? That's one. And after, yeah, I know what he said. The second thing will be, do I get it? Is it clear to me? Do I understand it, what he's saying? If not, I can always ask later on. And the third thing will be important. Is it a fact? Let me check. Advaita Vedanta has this beauty about it that you can actually always check. Nothing, nothing in Advaita Vedanta, or almost nothing in Advaita Vedanta, is a matter of speculation, faith or belief. The insistence is it's always directly available to us right now. So you can always check and ask yourself, is it a fact? If it is not a fact, Advaita insists it has to be a fact. If you feel it's not a fact, it still sounds speculative, still sounds theoretical, ask why? Where am I getting stuck? You examine it yourself and ask the teacher. Take a little bit of time maybe, but you'll make a breakthrough. So let's take the first method. I'll go through the three basic methods. One is the method of the seer and the seen. You are looking at the screen, looking at me in the screen. Now, the screen is the object and the eyes are the, screen is the scene, the eyes are the seer. The eyes are seeing the screen. So, okay. Attend not to the screen, but attend to the eyes. Attend means draw your attention, become more aware of your eyes than the object which they are seeing. The screen, you know the screen you can see many things, you can see many things, same pair of eyes sees many things. Seer is one, seen are many. The same pair of eyes not changing particularly, they can see a lot of changes from the morning till now. So many things have changed which you have been seeing. The scene keep changing. The seer does not change. And the seer, most importantly, the seer and the scene are different. What you are seeing on the screen is physically different from your eyes. In fact, the only thing that the eyes cannot see are the eyes themselves. To see something with the eyes, they have to be physically different. And of course visible, large enough and clear enough to be visible to the eyes. They must be physically different. The seer and the seen are different. Three things, the seer is one, the seen are many. The seer is unchanging, seen are changing. And the seer and the seen are different in a very nice, simple way. Don't be too philosophical about it. Moving on, you're now aware of the eyes. Notice the eyes themselves you're aware of. What's aware of the eyes? The mind is aware of the eyes. My eyes are open, my eyes are closed. I need glasses. All these things about my eyes, who knows? The mind knows. These are thoughts about my eyes. So the mind is the seer, now the seer within quotes. The mind does not actually physically see anything. It is aware of it, thinks about, it objectifies. What? The eyes. That which was the seer earlier is now the seen. The mind is the seer. Mind, seer, by now I mean knower and the eyes are known seen again those three things many things the mind can think about not only the eyes, the nose, the ears, all the sense organs. In fact, everything in the world, the mind thinks about everything the mind being itself. It can think about many things. Seer is one, seen are many. The mind being itself, the things it thinks about keeps on changing. The mind keeps on changing also, but mind changes into mind, thoughts into more thoughts. But the world, it changes in so many ways. So the seen keep changing, the seer is relatively unchanging. But most important, the seer and the seen are different. The mind which is the thinker of thoughts is different from what it thinks about. So the mind is the seer and the eyes are the seen. What about the world, the screen and the Swami in the screen? It's still the seen. There's always the seen. The eyes which were the seer earlier now have become the seen. You go further, the mind itself, thoughts, feelings, emotions, ideas, memories, these keep on coming and going. This is what we call the mind. But in and through all of that, shining is this awareness. Now, I am aware of my mind. If you are not, look into the mind. You will find thoughts, feelings, emotions, ideas, questions. You say, Swami, I don't find anything. Good. The mind is empty. To the emptiness, you find emptiness. So the mind, thoughts, and the absence of thoughts, that is the seeing. If it is the seeing, there must be a seer. The mind has many, many thoughts, feelings, emotions, but the seer of all of them is one. The mind keeps changing all the time from morning till night. So many thoughts, feelings, ideas, projects, energetic, tired, bored, all of that is changing. All of them, we must admit, they were noted, illumined, revealed by one awareness. They were noted, illumined, revealed by one awareness. And so the seer of the mind is unchanging, the scene is changing, the mind is changing. And therefore the seer and the scene being different, the seer of the mind must be different from the mind. Who are you? When you are seeing the laptop and through the eyes, on which side are you? There or here? I'm here. When I'm observing the eyes, thinking about the eyes with the mind, which side am I? Am I this the eyes which are an object or the mind which is the thinker? I'm the mind. When I'm aware of the thoughts and feelings of the mind, which am I? Am I a thought or a feeling or that which is aware of the thought and feeling? I'm the awareness. The awareness is the original one and only seer. Mind is seen, eyes and sense organs and body is seen, the world is seen. The world, body, sense organs, mind, they are different from the awareness which you are. I'm rushing through it. If you want a more slow and careful exposition of this, the whole teaching, 12 parts, Dhrig Drishya Viveka, it's available freely on the website of YouTube channel of the Vedanta Society of Southern California. Dhrig Drishya Viveka, about a 12-hour series on just this method. I'm just rushing through it, hoping that many of you have seen it already, or some of it at least. And this consciousness, this awareness is who I am. It is not changing, it is not many, it is not a thing out there. It's the pure subject, never an object. Same thing we come through, the pancha kosha, the method of the five layers of the human personality, which you find in the Taitiriya Upanishad, second chapter of the Taitiriya Upanishad. Start with the body. The question is, who am I? And we try to find it in our experience. Start with the body, physical body. Am I the body? And then we see the body is changing from childhood to youth, to middle age, to old age. And I am the same one who was the child. And I agree that I was the young person. I'm the middle-aged person. I'll be the old person. That means child, middle-aged, old, these are the states of the body. The body is changing. And if I am one and the same, I admit I was the same, how can I, the unchanging and the changing, be the same thing? Changing and unchanging cannot be the same thing. So I, the unchanging experiencer of the changing body, cannot be the body. And then other ways are there. You can apply Drigdrushya viveka here. I am the witness. I'm the experiencer of the body. The body is something that I experienced and the seer and the scene must be different. And so the body is not me. You can apply awareness and object of awareness. I'm aware of the body. The body is not aware of me. I can say, hey body, you are doing well these days or you're not doing too well these days. You need to lose weight. The body never says to me, hey Swami, how are you? Are you good? The body never talks back to me. The body is not aware that I exist. I am aware of the existence of the body. I the awareness, the body which is an object, how can they be the same thing? It's a thing. It's as much of a thing as this book or this piece of cloth. It's a thing. I am aware. The awareness of the thing. I'm aware of the body. Then what am I? I am not the body but I feel I am somewhere in there. I'm aware of the thing, I'm aware of the body. Then what am I? I am not the body, but I feel I am somewhere in there. I'm this awareness in there. All right, let's look. In there, subtler than the body, inward to the body, the breath. Then step by step, we're going subtler and inward. Breath, breathing in. We did it for the Buddhist meditation. The Buddhist was interested in using the breath as an anchor for awareness. But what Vedanta asks you to do is think about it. Are you the breath? Does the breath change? Yes, of course. Breathing in, breathing out, the prana which is behind the breath is sometimes energetic, sometimes tired, sometimes healthy, sometimes sick. It changes. And I am identified with all of them. I say, I am breathing in. I am breathing out. I am sick. I am healthy. I am hungry. I am full. These are all states of the prana. I am the same one identified with different states of prana. So I am not the prana. Because it changes, I don't change. It's an object. I'm the subject. I'm aware of it. It is not aware of me. I'm not the prana. In Sanskrit, these words are very simple and powerful. Savikara, nirvikara, drashta and Drishya, Chit, Jada. But where am I? I'm somewhere in there. Okay, inert to the prana, deeper. The mind, thoughts, emotions, memories. Am I that? Most people stop there. I'm the mind. I'm the person. I never really believed that I was the body, but I'm the person in the body. I'm an embodied person. Same thing in the mind. Applied. Does the mind change? Yes, it does. Happy one time, sad at the other time, forgetful at one time, with the sharpest memory at the other time, curious and bored, and so many things, angry and peaceful. Which one are you? If you are the mind, which one are you? You say, no, no, sometimes I'm angry, sometimes I'm peaceful. That means you are not tied with angry mind, peaceful mind. You are the one which experienced anger and absence of anger. You're the one who experienced curiosity and boredom. It's the mind which is changing. You are not changing. So changing, unchanging, you cannot be the changing mind. You are aware of the mind. You are the seer of the mind. Drashtra and Drishya, seer and seen. You the seer and seen must be different. You cannot be the mind because you see the mind. See means know the mind. If you want, you can introspect. You can know the thoughts and feelings. You do. And even more stunning, mind is not conscious or at least mind is not consciousness. You are consciousness. You are awareness. You shining, the mind is illumined. The mind appears to be conscious. But you are consciousness. They are right there in the mind. This awareness and a thought, they are two different things. Thoughts come and go. Awareness does not come and go. Same awareness which is aware of happy thought, same awareness aware of miserable thought. Awareness has not changed, thought changed. So awareness and not aware, chit jara, you cannot be the mind. You look further inwards, the faculty of understanding intellect buddhi. One second. The faculty of understanding the buddhi that also we are not because that also changing our understanding is changing. You are aware of your understanding, drashta and drishya and you are awareness even the buddhi understanding is not awareness. That might sound like a strange thing to say. So we are in such subtle realms that most people don't think in this way. The intellect, suppose you get something, you suddenly understand that, oh, seer and seen are different. Seer and seen are different. This thought, seer and seen are different. This understanding, the seer and seen are different. This thought, seer and seeing are different. This understanding, the seer and seeing are different. This is also something you are aware of. It's not aware. This understanding, seer and seeing are different. Is it saying, hey, Swami, you got me all right. No, it's not aware of me. It's not aware of anything. It's just a state of the buddhi, of the intellect. It's made a breakthrough, that's all. You are not the intellect also. If you push beyond that, you will hit a blank wall. Beyond the mind, you'll hit just blankness. Suppose you drop awareness of the mind, no thinking, no understanding, no memory, no desire, blank. But that blank is also an object because you are aware of the blank. The awareness illumines the absence of thoughts, which is that blankness, which is basically what happens in deep sleep. There are no thoughts, no feelings, no perceptions, but that's a blankness. The moment you wake up, you recall a blankness. Where at the time of the blankness, you cannot think. If you think, then the mind is active. But afterwards, when the mind becomes active, you can always reflexively go back and say that there was a time when the mind was not active, which means that time was revealed by an awareness. OK. What I've just done is the five sheets of the human personality, physical Annamaya Kosha, vital Pranamaya Kosha, mental Manomaya Kosha, intellectual Vijnanamaya Kosha, subtler and subtler and subtler, inwards and inwards and inwards and the blankness beyond everything, the darkness beyond the mind Ananda Mayakosha, the bliss sheep. Beyond these the witness of all of these, illumining all of these, their activities and their absence of their activities is you the awareness. You are not physical like the body. The awareness is not physical. You are not vital prana like the pranamaya kosha. You are not a thought or an idea like the manomaya or vijnanamaya kosha. You're not nothing either, blankness like the anandamaya kosha. You are awareness. You're of the nature of light. You illumine activities of all these five sheets. Same thing. Do you notice by the way of the seer and the seen and by the way of these five sheets, we are basically coming to the same awareness. It is the same awareness which reveals your waking. It reveals all our experiences in waking. It illumines our dreams. It illumines the deepness, the darkness of deep sleep also. That is called the fourth in the way of the threeness, the darkness of deep sleep also. That is called the fourth in the way of the three, three states, waking, dreaming, deep sleep, Mandukya Upanishad. That also points to that same awareness by the way of Drig Drishya, seer and seen, you points to that one unchanging light of awareness, which you are by the way of the five sheets Pancha Kosha Viveka. It points to that one unchanging light of awareness, which you are by the way of the five sheets, pancha kosha viveka, it points to that one unchanging light of awareness which you are. By the way of the three states of waking, dreaming, deep sleep, mandukya, I have what, 50, 60 classes on the mandukya karika. All they point to you, the unchanging awareness. This is what, this awareness is what is meant when the teacher says, tat tvam asi, that thou art. Where? Here and everywhere. When? Now and all the time. You are that reality. What is that reality? Let's see what we have found. It's like this awareness which we are, in some sense, we all know that we are awareness. I mean, it's not, we don't think in terms of CRC in five sheets and three states, all that sounds very fancy, but we all know we are aware. But we are like that washer man who was not aware of the value of the diamond which he had got. The story which Sri Ramakrishna tells of a washerman who, so to think of India, where the washerman would go around collecting your dirty laundry and would take it to the river bank and they would scrub it dry and they would use a stone to scrub. You don't want to see what they do to your fancy clothes, but they get it clean. Now this washerman, he found a strange stone on the river bank and he found it's very good for scrubbing clothes, so he used it for scrubbing clothes. Now he thought it's rather unique and he had the good sense to go and ask. He said, I'm an uneducated man, but my friend, the vegetable seller, he is more knowledgeable about these things than me, let me go and ask him. And he showed him that stone and he said, how much will you give me for it? The vegetable seller said, I've never seen such a fancy stone. I'll give you 10 rupees for it. The washer man had a good sense to hold on to the stone. So finally, the story is he goes to a dweller, a diamond merchant, and the diamond merchant says, I've never seen such a huge diamond. It's magnificent. I'll give you 10 million rupees for it. And so all the wants, all this poverty of the washer man was removed because of that diamond which he had all the time and he was using it to scrub clothes and different people valued it differently until you went to the diamond merchant who said you have the solution to all your problems right there and you've been using it but you've been using it for to scrub clothes. This awareness which we have which we are actually this is the solution. This is the secret of the universe right there, but we are using it like the washer man. What do we use it for? We use it day and night. We use it to see and smell and taste and touch. We use it to hear. We use it to quarrel and we use it day and night. We use it to see and smell and taste and touch. We use it to hear. We use it to quarrel and we use it to feel unhappy. We use it for to earn money and to fight wars and and to be miserable. And we use it for learning philosophy and going to and becoming religious. All the things of our life, the entire drama of our life is played out by that awareness, that Vashaman stone which we have got. Let's now, so luckily we have come to Advaita, which is the diamond merchant, who's now going to introduce us to the wonders of this stone, which we have got, this awareness which we have got. What are the wonders? You do not die. Sri Krishna says in the Bhagavad Gita, he says death is just like, he gives two wonderful examples. One is very famous. Just as you get rid of a suit of old clothes of soil clothes and put on a new suit. Similarly, we get rid of this body and when it's no longer functional and we put on a new one. See, from a Vedantic perspective, what happens at death? From a Vedantic perspective, what's going on here? You are that awareness, there's no doubt, but that awareness is clothed in, as we just saw, five sheaths. So there's the sheath called the subtle body, mind and intellect and prana. And there's the sheath called the subtle body, mind, and intellect, and prana. And there's the sheath called the physical body, the gross body. So we have the physical body and the subtle body. And there's something called the causal body also. And beyond that, that awareness which we are. It sounds pretty speculative here, Swami. Not at all. You can check right now. You can check right now. Physical body, nobody asks for proof. Everybody sees it. It's a public fact here. What about the subtle body? That sounds esoteric. No, no, no, nothing esoteric about it. Just take a look. You have thoughts and feelings and emotions, ideas, memories, the very personality, the person you think you are, that's the subtle body. That's all. That's the subtle body. Technically Advaita Vedanta will say it is Pranamaya Kosha, Manomaya Kosha, Vijnanamaya Kosha. This is called Sukshma Sharira, subtle body. Completely a matter of fact for you. No doctor or scientist will be able to detect it. And yet for you, it's the most important fact. Aren't your thoughts a fact? Aren't your emotions and desires a fact? Aren't your memories and personality a fact for you? The most important fact, it's you. It's what we normally think without any Vedanta. We normally think that's who I am. Tell me one doctor who has been able to detect one thought. One neuroscientist who has been able to detect one thought? One neuroscientist who has been able to detect one perception? None. I tell you, none. I tell you, it's impossible in principle. What can they detect? They can detect at the most, the subtlest activities in the physical body. The tiny firings of neurons, electrical activity in the neurons in the brain. That's the last thing you can detect. As long as you are using physical instruments, the last thing you can detect is a physical activity. But beyond that, the subtle activity, thoughts, feelings, emotions, which are clear to every one of you. If it's not clear to you, you're a zombie. The American term for zombie is that there's a physical living body, but there's nobody inside. The lights are off inside. I trust none of us here are zombies. So if you're not a zombie, you have a subtle body. But what the uniqueness of Vedanta is normally we think that it's not a body. That's me. You're talking about me. It's not you, it's a body. It's as much not you as these clothes are not you. You may be wearing it now, but they're not stuck to you. They are not you. Just as you are not this suit of clothes you're wearing, you are not even the physical body, you're not even the subtle body. But at death, what happens is this, the Vedantic idea of death is the physical body dies. So just last week we had a panel. It was a pretty serious, one of the most serious panels I attended. They invited a priest, a rabbi and a Swami, and it's not a joke. It's about, it was just the opposite of a joke. In fact, it was about the most serious of things. It was about DNR, do not resuscitate. So two hour long discussion about, you know, the very serious decision to let go of somebody if they have not given a DNR declaration, a do not resuscitate declaration. How do you pull the plug? Can you, should you, would you? Could you? So this discussion but then what is the Vedantic idea of death? It's just the physical body what you see which happens physical body that dies not the person not the subtle body. The Swami prove it very easy actually. Swami prove it very easy actually. You have two series going together body and mind, but you have access as an outside observer. You have access only to the body about the person inside we have only the reports coming from you from that body. I have a thought I have a pain I have a desire I have a feeling Who is telling you it's coming through that body? Now you know when the physical body dies, that's death. That second series to which you had only access to the physical body, how are you claiming for sure that that series is also dead? How do you know? That series has no access to you anymore, nor do you have any access to that. It could still be going on, but you just can't access it. Not relevant, but it's such a touching story I would like to tell you here. It came up in our discussions. So, a few years back, I happened to meet this gentleman in Dallas. He's a shaman. You know what a shaman is? Native American traditions. So he is a bit of a psychic, a very interesting character. So he's known for being able to interact with that second series, you know, after death, he can actually, in some cases, interact with the person. He's very clear. He says, I have absolutely, it's a clear fact to me that people do not die with the death of the bodies. In so many cases, I have actually interacted with, they have talked to me, I have talked to them. In some cases, they have come back after a near-death experience. And so we have corroborated it. When the second, the body also comes back, the two series are together, and that person says, yes, this is what you said to me. This is what I said to you when I was so-called the body was dead. So, but the touching story is this. This is a discussion was about do not resuscitate. Okay, so it's, but it's so moving. I would like to share this with you. So this gentleman, he told us this story, a gathering of people in Dallas. He said, one of the most moving cases that I was called in for was for a little girl who was brain dead and who was on life support machinery. And there was no hope. There's no chance, medically, there's no chance of coming back. The body is finished. I mean, it's just being kept alive by these machines. And they had even removed her from the hospital, sent her back home for palliative, not even palliative care, just the last few days. And the parents were being urged to, you know, do that DNR, remove the life support and let her go. And she was a very little kid. And finally, the parents agreed. They said that they realized there's nothing else we can do actually. And what's the point of just keeping a shell alive like this? So the legal formalities, so they had called him in also. And he also said, yeah, that's a good decision. You can even do that. And he said, I had nothing more to do because there were lawyers there, there was the police there, there were doctors there, they were at home and they wanted to pull the plug on the child and the parents were there. So he said, I went out, I was sitting this shaman. He said, I was sitting in the lawn outside and I saw they had taken the decision. Then finally the cars pulled out of the driveway, the lawyers and the doctors and the police went away. The technicians, they packed up the machines, they went away. Minutes later, the parents shouted out to me and they implored me to come inside. So he said, I ran back inside, what's wrong? They expected that immediately the heartbeat, which was supported at in would stop. They removed the machines and it was all removed, heartbeat and breathing and everything stopped. Within seconds it started back on again by itself. So the heart is beating, the child is breathing on her own without any machines. Now what do you do? She's still technically brain dead. There's no reaction. She's in deep coma. There is no feeding going on, no breathing, no heart machine, no heart lung machine, nothing, no support. Are you going to kill her? You'll have to actually have to suffocate her to let her go away. No, but now what do you do now? You remove the machines and she's living by herself. So the parents were stunned. What do we do now? And they implored him, can you do something? So he said, I can try. And he put up certain rituals he did. And they have certain feathers they put in there. And he said, I clearly felt the presence of the little girl. And I asked her, what is the matter? What are you doing? And she said, I know I can't live in this body. I will go. But my mother will cry. So I can't go. You tell her to let me go. So he actually told this, it was so moving, you know, the people in the audience had, there was hardly anybody with a dry eye there. He said, I told the mother and she agreed and she sat with that little child, you know, with the and talked to her sweetly and said that we love you and we will always remember you. And I know that you want to go. Don't worry. I understand that you are still there, that you have not gone anywhere and you'll be in a much better place and go happily. We'll all be happy. Don't worry. I'll be happy. And as she went on saying this, the breathing stopped, the heartbeat stopped and she was gone. And breathing stopped, the heartbeat stopped, and she was gone. And he said, I clearly felt a presence move away from that place, and she was gone. Now, what an interesting thing. Clearly, the two cities are different. So the idea that there's a subtle body which inhabits this physical body for some time, and at death, only the physical body falls away. But Vedanta pushes further. You are not even the subtle body. You are not even that person. That individual human person which we are, the personality, even that changes. That's changing continuously. Moment to moment, thoughts, feelings, emotions, likes, dislikes, lifetime after lifetime, so many changes. You are not even that. You are that one light which is immortal. Even the subtle body is technically immortal in the sense, I'm saying technically because it changes and is subject to many kinds of modifications. And finally it goes away also. At the time of enlightenment, it is said after the death of the physical body, the subtle body also, it's also a body. It's also made of matter, it's called subtle matter. It melts back into a nature, into the ultimate reality. And you remain as unlimited consciousness. So that's at the final birth, the birth in which you will be enlightened. And when that body dies, the physical body dies. And then that second series, the subtle in which you will be enlightened. When that body dies, the physical body dies, and then that second series, the subtle body, also disappears. So you are no longer encased in a body, neither physical nor subtle. Anyway, so that's the first thing we note about this consciousness. It's immortal. It does not die. Krishna says, as you change clothes, you change bodies. Death is, you have done it 1,000 times earlier, 10,000 times earlier. Nobody can stop this body from dying. But it's really nothing to you. You are masters at it. You accomplish it just like that, going from a body to the other body. No need absolutely to be afraid of death. One great, great advantage, big step forward. I am already that immortal awareness. Not physical body, not even the subtle body. Even the subtle body will survive the death of this physical body. I'm not even that. I am there when the subtle body shuts down the death of this physical body. I'm not even that. I am there when the subtle body shuts down in deep sleep, for example. I'm still there. But just that I can't think. It's like the subtle body is like a set of apps. You have a phone which can do many things only if you have the apps. But all the material is there. Capacities are there. If the app is working, you can do those things. Therefore, your phone can do those things. But they are just apps. Subtle body is a set of apps you've got. Second, so immortal. In Sanskrit, nitya, eternal. You are that eternal awareness. Death is nothing to you. It's a shadow passing on you. You are that vast blue sky in which clouds gather and the movement of clouds and the storm that's a lifetime and slowly the clouds dissipate and it goes and the vast blue sky is left. That's a life over but you were always the vast blue sky. The clouds were born in you. They played around in you and they disappeared back. You are exactly the same. Okay. Second, even deeper. All that you are aware of, the world, the body, the mind, they are not real. They are appearances. They are nothing other than you, the awareness, appearing to you with names and forms. A good example is this. In your dreams, as we fall asleep, the world disappears before us. Even the fact that I'm sleeping on the bed, this physical body, that also goes away. A world appears. A world of dreams appears to us, places, peoples, objects, activities, and a body which I call myself. I'm in that dream too. Nowadays we can imagine it very nicely as a virtual reality. So a kind of dream virtual reality appears to us in every dream. And we are active, we say things, we do things, and we feel it's like a living experience. We don't doubt it. Now, when we wake up, we realize all those places and people and activities, including the body, which I thought I was, all of that merges back into me, the dreamer's mind. And I realized none of that was anything apart from my mind. I did not actually go to those places. I did not actually meet those people. I did not actually do those things, or eat that stuff, or say those things also. All of it was my mind playing around, projecting it. This awareness has projections. What are these projections? These projections, the first projection of awareness is the mind, a sense of I and thoughts and emotions and ideas and memories. The next set of projections is a set of senses, seeing, smelling, tasting, touching. And then the next set of projections is an object to the senses, forms that you see, touch, things that you touch, smell, taste, all those objects of your senses. And that's what constitutes the so-called physical solid world out there. They are sensory experiences appearing to the sense powers, which are projections from the mind, which is a projection from awareness. None of it actually physically a second reality apart from awareness. Not being a second reality apart from awareness, this is called non-dualism, non-dualism of the awareness. It appears to be a second. I like that story about that businessman you know in India who got into debt and so he had to pawn off his favorite image of Ganesha and he goes to the gold the jeweler and says give me some money and keep this image of Ganesha. How much will you give me for Ganesha this much money? How much will you give me for the mouse? Ganesha has a little mouse golden mouse and he said the same rate same by the same weight the man was furious what Ganesha that God has the same rate as a mouse. The goldsmith said sir to you it's Ganesha and it's a mouse, for me it's gold. In the same way, these are names and forms which appear, names, forms and activities, names, forms and function in Sanskrit, Nama, Rupa, Vyavahara, appearing on the surface of the radiance of consciousness, which you are. You are that consciousness. And everything that you experience is not a second reality up here, apart from you. If you see yourself as a body and a person, these are all second realities. Imagine you in your dream, whatever you see appears to be a second reality apart from you. But the moment you wake up, everything that you saw in your dream was you. From your consciousness perspective, from your body perspective, all these are separate from you. But from your awareness perspective, all this world is nothing other than what you sense. All that you sense is nothing other than your mind. And all your mind is nothing other than like waves on the surface of an ocean, the ocean of consciousness which you are. It's a non-dual reality. There's a logic behind it. There's no time, that's why I'm not telling you. I want to explore a little further. This is the meaning of Brahma Satyam Jagat Mithya. Brahman or consciousness, you are the reality and the world is an appearance. What is the world? The world you see, hear, smell, taste. What we're seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, it's nothing apart from you the mind. You the mind is nothing apart from the consciousness which is the real you. The world is an appearance. The world is not a second reality apart from you. But this is also another way of saying that everything in the world is you. You see God is the only reality. The world is false. They're the same statement. Can you think about it? And then this way all this is nothing other than God. All this is false. It is false as an independent separate material world, which we think about it. No, that's not the reality. But as God it's the reality. And we are talking about the same thing. It is the same thing to say Brahma Satyam and Jagat Mithya. The same thing to say the rope is real and the snake is false. The same thing. you're saying the same thing. If this world were real, then Brahman the ultimate reality would have to be some other reality because this is a real world. But the world is not real. In ignorance it's a world, In knowledge, it is you, the consciousness. Another point. There is no limit to this consciousness. Right now, we feel we are limited. And what do I mean limited? Here I am. I'm here in New York, and in Manhattan, and in the Vedanta Society, in my room, in my chair. I'm limited. I'm limited in space. I'm limited in my chair. I'm limited. I'm limited in space. I'm limited in time. I was born on that date so many years ago. And I'm going to die in a few years, hence, in some particular date. I'm limited in time. I had a beginning. I'll have an end. And I'm limited as a person. This person, I'm not anything else. I'm just Sarvapriyananda. These limits are not there in consciousness. Consciousness or this awareness, Brahman, Atman, whatever you call it, the real you, unlimited. How so? Space is in you, the awareness. You, the awareness, are not in space. I like this. I tell this example many times when this was being taught in a ashram in Haridwar, a monk at the back, you know, when the teacher said you are all pervading awareness and the monk at the back raised his hand and said, hey, wait a minute, hold it right there. Let alone being all pervading. I'm right here. I'm not all pervading. I am right here. I'm not even there where you are teaching from. I'm just here sitting in my seat. How can I be all pervading? I don't even pervade this hall. I'm here, not there in Hindi. I'm here and not there. How can I be all pervading? And the answer was wonderful. The teacher said, he said, but here and there, are they not both in your awareness? Yaha or waha, kya dono hi tumme nahi hai in chetan mein? In what sense? Suppose you say in your dream, it's a dream. You don't know it's a dream. I'm sitting here. And then somebody comes to me in the dream and says, look all of this, the park and the sky and the place and all these people, they are all in you, all spaces within you. I say, what nonsense, I'm right here and not even there and those places are far apart and that's the east side of Manhattan, that's the west side of Manhattan, they are all separate from me. But when I wake up who will be right? That man in the dream who told me the whole thing was within you will be right. So, okay, that's an example of a dream. But how is that true in the waking state? In the waking state think about it. Where is the limit of your awareness? But Swami, what do you mean? Take a look around. You can only see the limits of your walls. What's beyond your walls is beyond your awareness. No, there's a difference between perception, knowledge and awareness. What I see here, it is in my awareness as the seen, but there is something vast beyond this I know it's in my awareness as the unseen unknown, but still in my awareness. If I ever were to see it, I would see it only in my awareness. If I ever were to hear it, I would hear it only in my awareness. The world exists as known and unknown in awareness and this set sets of known and unknown. They are permeable sets of known and unknown they are permeable sets sometimes things keep coming from the unknown set into the known going from the known set into the unknown known and unknown together make up your awareness. So there is no limit to your awareness. Time is not a limit, space is not a limit. Time and space are in awareness. Awareness is not in time and space. Awareness is, you're not a slice of awareness located in a particular space. Rather, space is something that appears to you in awareness, just like a dream. Time, you're not like a flash of awareness moving from past to present to future. Past, present and future move back and forth in you, the awareness. Just track it in your experience, you will see it is true. Time and space do not limit you. You're unlimited in time and space. It's like water. If you look at the waves in the ocean, the waves seem to have boundaries. This wave, that wave, that wave. But if you look at water, where is the boundary between one wave and the other? It's all water. The wave is water, that wave is water, in between is also water, the boundary also is water. It's one seamless water. In the same way, it's one seamless awareness which appears as you the subject and the objective universe. You the seer and the seen. Swami Vivekananda says one alone exists. It appears as nature and soul. Nature means this material universe. Soul means the experiencing person. It is one seamless whole, one endless, without any distinction, without any barrier, one awareness. The universe is one with you. Am I one with the universe? No. There's an interesting thing. All the movies on the screen are one with the screen. No movie, no tragedy, no comedy, nothing good and bad movies, nothing can exist without the screen. But the screen is not one with the movies. Screen is completely independent of the movies. It can exist with a comedy, it can exist with a tragedy, it can exist without a movie. You are like that screen, an awareness. All the worlds, they exist in you, none of them exist apart from you. But you, the consciousness, the awareness, you can exist apart from the worlds. When the worlds disappear, in the great pralaya, the dissolution of the worlds at the end of the cycle of the the worlds disappear in the great pralaya, the dissolution of the worlds at the end of the cycle of the universe, or in deep sleep, you are the awareness, you still exist. You are unlimited. And this awareness is not an object. Very important. Where is this awareness? What is this? How can I grasp it? You can never grasp it as an object. Krishna says, apramaya, it's not an object of knowledge. Apramaya, prama means the instrument of knowledge, so or correct knowledge. Pramana is this instrument by which you know. So the eyes see, eyes are an instrument of knowledge, ears are an instrument of knowledge, inference is an instrument of knowledge, inference is an instrument of knowledge and so on and so forth. All of them reveal objects in the world. Eyes reveal forms, ears reveal sound, scientific inference reveals scientific truths about the world. And all of them are powered, illumined by you, the awareness. None of them reveal you, you reveal them. Instrument of knowledge, pramana, the object of knowledge, prameya, and the knowledge, prama. Instrument of knowledge, eyes. Object of knowledge, this book. Eyes are the instrument of knowledge. This is the object of knowledge. And the knowledge I'm having, that I see the book. All three are revealed by I the consciousness. I the knower, the eyes themselves, the book and the knowledge of the book are revealed by I the consciousness. You the consciousness, you shining, everything else shines. By your light, everything is lit up. It is the pure subject. It's never an object. The Kena Upanishad says this again and again. What, by which the mind thinks, but which the mind cannot think about. That is consciousness, that is awareness. The mind does it, look at it right now, it's not being, they're not being cute or being very profound, this is telling a fact. All the thoughts of the mind, all the thinking, memories, desires, they're all there in awareness. By that the mind thinks. Awareness reveals the activities of the mind. But nothing in the mind can reveal awareness. It's like the sun shines on the moon and the moonlight reveals the world. Consciousness or awareness shines on the mind and the mind can think about the world. Consciousness or awareness shines on the mind, and the mind can think about the world. But the moonlight does not reveal the sun. It's impossible. First of all, the moonlight is nothing other than the sunlight. And second, the moonlight is not necessary to reveal the sun. The sun blazes forth with its own light, a million times more bright. So similarly, you, the consciousness, you shining on the mind and the senses, you reveal thoughts and seeing and hearing and smelling and tasting and their respective objects. None of them can reveal you. By which the eyes see, but which the eyes cannot see. Know that to be Brahman, not what you think is as this object. It's not something that you see or hear or smell or taste or touch or think about or speak about. But all thinking, speaking, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching are because of that. In language of the Upanishads, that shining, everything else shines. By its light, everything is illumined. Tam eva bhantam anubhati sarvam tasya bhaasa sarvam idam vibhati. You shining, everything else shines, by your light everything is illumined. One more point. We are all exploring this awareness which you are. This awareness, the way I'm talking about it, is it subject to change? Can it change? Or is all change revealed by awareness? Birth, aging, death, health, disease, movement, all of these changes in the world, they are revealed by awareness. Does the awareness itself change? Can it change? Logically, it's impossible. If it does change, that awareness, if you can note that change, then to what will it be revealed? It's to awareness alone. Who else will reveal a change in the awareness, except awareness? Then that change becomes an object. It's no longer awareness. Do you see what I mean? If there is a change in something in the world, it is revealed to you, the awareness. Do you see what I mean? If there is a change in something in the world, it is revealed to you the awareness. If there is a change in you the awareness, to what will it be revealed? It should reveal to me the awareness. In that case, you are the revealer of the change. The change is no longer in you. Because remember, seer and seen are different. You might say at this point, well, there might be a change in me, the awareness, which I might not know about, which I might not reveal. If that is so, there's no use talking about it. If there is, then anything you can talk about, which can never be known. So if it cannot ever be known, no need to talk about it. It should at least be in principle be knowable or illuminable by consciousness. So consciousness does not change. You the awareness, you do not change. Everything else changes. What have we been saying so far? I'll put it together. You the awareness revealed by the method of Dhrig Drishya, seer and seen. You the awareness revealed by the method of the five sheets. You the awareness revealed by the method of Drig Drishya, seer and seen. You, the awareness revealed by the method of the five sheets. You, the awareness revealed by the method of the three states, waking, dreaming, and deep sleep. That awareness is immortal, will not die, is not born either. It reveals birth and death of the body. It reveals the transmigration, like that little girl going away from the dying body to its destiny. That subtle body going from body to body that is revealed by you the awareness. You are that immortal awareness, no death for you. Second, you are the reality. Everything else is only your appearance. You are real, the world is an appearance. Brahma Satyam Jagat Mithya means you are the reality of which the world, you the awareness, not you the person. You the awareness is the reality of the person immediately says, that's cool, I'm the only reality. No, if you think you are the only reality as the person, that's the philosophical fault called solipsism. No, you are the reality as the one awareness. The world is an appearance. It's not a second reality apart from you. Therefore, you the awareness are non-dual, advaitam. Third, you the awareness are limitless. Space does not limit you because it appears in you. You are not appearing in space, just like a dream. Time does not limit you. You are the experiencer of time. Time does not experience you. No object, no being, nothing in the world limits you because they all are in you. Just as a wave cannot limit water, right? A wave cannot limit water because every bit of the wave is water only. Nothing in the world can limit you. You are unlimited. You are not an object. You are the pure subject. Aprameya. You reveal the activities of the mind, intellect, senses. They do not reveal you. You are the pure subject. Therefore, you cannot be known as an object. You cannot be seen, smelled, touched, tasted, you the awareness. You cannot be thought about, you cannot be expressed in language, but all of that is being done because of you, your presence. You blessing the senses and the mind and the intellect. The senses can see, hear, smell, taste, touch. The mind can think, hear, smell, taste, touch. The mind can think, intellect can understand, memory can remember all of the functions because of you. All of it is active because of you. And they are remember, they are nothing other than you. They are all appearances in you. And you are beyond any kind of change. All changes are in this world of appearance, you do not change. Therefore, putting it all together, you are not subject to this cycle of birth and death. You are not a part of this chain of karma. You are not a doer of deeds, nor are you the sufferer of the consequences of those deeds. Though you reveal the entire game, it's only because you the consciousness, the mind illumined by that consciousness and associated with the body does deeds and the so-called person gets the results of those deeds. Karma functions at that level. You are not bound by karma, but karma appears in you. So you are free of this whole cycle of karma. This freedom from the cycle of karma is called moksha, mukta. But Swami, that means I am free right now. Yes, you are. You are free right now. As consciousness, you are free of karma. The moksha which Vedanta talks about, which all these systems of philosophy have been talking about, to attain moksha, liberation, freedom from cycle of birth and death, freedom from karma, you have it already, it's your very nature, you are free. Because you are eternal, immortal, because you are the reality of which the world is an appearance, non-dual, because you are limitless in which time and space have their play, but you are not in that because you are changeless. Because of that, you are free of karma. You are free of bondage. You are liberated. Knowing this reality, understanding it is the result of Shravana and Manana. Once some kind of clarity dawns and you can see right now it's not all that easy, but once that kind, some kind of clarity dawns, then you move on to the next stage of making it a living reality through meditation. When we do it through living, we can living reality through meditation, that is called Jeevan Mukti, living liberation, that we can actually manifest that, we can live that truth in our day-to-day activities in the midst of aggravations, in the midst of being, acting like an embodied being in the midst of all of these others. So you will play this role of being the person, but now you know you are not a person anymore. You are an impersonal reality, an infinite impersonal reality. Living like that is called Jeevan Mukti, free while living and that's the goal of Advaita Vedanta. So we'll take it forward in the next class. I've gone a little bit over time, but I think I've been able to convey. Quick outline, what did I do? What is Vedanta? What are the main texts? What it is not? What is Vedanta? What are the main texts? What it is not? What is Vedanta? What it is not? Vedanta is very simple. Tattvamasi. What it is not? What is the process? Hearing, reflection, meditation. Then the actual inquiry, method of seer and seeing, method of the five sheets, method of the three states. All of these, they take months and months to explain. And I've got, there are talks and they're available all over the place. Then having got a good grasp on what the teaching is, you explore it, realize your immortality, realize your infinitude, realize that you are the truth of which the world is an appearance, realize that you are beyond change and beyond death, realize that you are already free. Then make it living, make it a fact, make it effortless. Make it effortless, how do you do that? And that is what we'll see in the next two classes. Om Shanti Shanti Shanti Hari Om Tat Sat Shri Ramakrishna Rupanam Astu. you


