 Thank you. Om Asato Maa Sadgamaya Tamaso Maa Jyotir Gamaya Mrityor Maa Amritam Gamaya Om Shanti Shanti Shanti He So, welcome to the third session of this course. Today we are going to study mind and perception. The perceptive process, this is very important to study, important to know because your perception is your main means of knowledge, is not it? Perception cognition that is your the main means that is the epistemology. Epistemology means actually the study of how you know, it is one of the major branches of philosophy. Philosophy has three branches, ontology studies what is reality, epistemology studies how you know and axiology is about values, study of values. So, epistemology is studying the methods of knowledge, the means of knowledge. One of the most important means of knowledge is perception, is not it? When you perceive, you know the thing. Now, how exactly this perception takes place? This is what we will be studying, because if you know the heart of perception, you will also know what you can do with that perception, how you can augment it, what it can do it for you. And in fact, that is the way of knowing that is the normal what what in ah um nyai philosophy we call praman, proof of something being there is that you can perceive it hm you know these pramanas which are used commonly in philosophy every system of philosophy has its own pramanas which means its own proofs its own means of knowledge. So, perception is a common praman in philosophies, even in science is not it, science is entirely based on perception what you can see. Perception basically means the knowledge brought to you by the senses, knowing by the input of the senses is what you call perception. Now, perception need not just be dependent on senses also, we will go to this, we will go to the study of this, but normally in science this is the way we understand it. Know how through the senses, knowing something through the senses is what we call perception. Now in all of these philosophies as I was telling you, there are different ah pramanas or proofs means of knowing, but perception is quite common to many of these philosophies. Even in Patanjali Yogasutras for example, you have these 3 ah ah proofs given 3 pramanas are mentioned like pratyaksha, pratyaksha is perception, anumanam is inference and they call it shastra praman which means apta vakya or scriptural evidence, agamaha, pratyaksha anumanam agamaha pramanani you will find in Patanjali Yogasutras. So, these are the three means of knowledge being used by that scripture. Vedanta also uses actually 6 means, butthe most important ones are these 3 again, pratyaksha which is perception and inference and scriptural evidence. So, perception is a very important means of knowledge. Now, today we are going to study the art and science of perception. You must also know let me tell you some fundamental facts about perception before we actually go into the perceptive process. There is external perception, is not it? You get knowledge by external perception. There is also internal perception. This is something maybe you have not thought about, but your entire mind activity it is internal perception is not it, you are not using your senses there, but what has been recorded through the senses has become your memory and you are perceiving through your memory, you are knowing something through ideation, mentation and memory. So, there is internal perception also, there is something beyond this information also which is also called perception, which we will go into gradually. So, there is external perception and internal perception. Now, external perception you have ways to enhance it, to augment it. The simple spectacles that you are wearing that is a means to enhance your perception, is not it? Your visual perception is being enhanced by your glasses, reading glasses. So, also any gadget which the human being has invented, please see this. It is meant to augment the perception of your senses, your telescopes and microscopes, the Hubble space telescope which you have installed there. It is giving you a part of the universe which you cannot see. So, it is actually augmenting your visual perception, what you cannot see it is helping you see. Every gadget is like that, it is helping you see something more than what you can see. So, this since this is our primary means of knowledge perception we have invented gadgets we have discovered ways of augmenting this perception. So, also internal perception can be augmented, your awareness can be increased brought into full bloom and your mentation the capacity of your mind can be increased brought into full bloom and your meditation the capacity of your mind can be increased. You know the way to realize this what self knowledge we have been discussing about according to the Upanishads it is to be known through a very refined enhanced intellect. Drishyate tvagraya buddhaya sukshmaya sukshmadarshibhi. So, there this very refined intellect dhi has become one of the instruments of perception hm like that your your awareness can be cultured not that exactly your awareness is being cultured, but the overactive mind is being brought under control. So, that the volume of awareness in your mind increases. Awareness is always the same, but mind activity can obscure that awareness. So, if you clear the mind, awareness level increases. So, these are all techniques, methods just like how you can augment external perception, you can also augment through yogic techniques internal perception, you can develop a separate faculty called the dhi. In the Vedanta this is what is used to know Vedantic truth, you need to have a very special kind of buddhi which is turned inward, which is very much enhanced awareness wise and which is refined. So, that it leads you directly to the truth this is what is called Dhi. Ab jab Gayatri repeat karte ho the word Dhi comes there is not it Dhi yo yo na hm they are asking for their it is a prayer for getting this higher intellect this luminous buddhi which will take you to the source of your perception, the source of your perceptive process which is the seat of your experience consciousness, it will awaken that higher consciousness in you it is a prayer for that. So, you see just as you have methods to enhance external perception you have means to enhance internal perception. Now, one more thing you which you should know about perception is, perception requires mindfulness. If your mind is not in place, there can be no perception even if you are actually looking at an object. For example, just now you are hearing this lecture and you will be seeing a slide after some time. You may be looking at the slide, but if your mind is not there, you are looking, but you are not seeing. Seeing becomes look, looking becomes seeing when mind is there, when you are mindful. If your mind is somewhere else, it is preoccupied with a movie which you have been seeing, then you are not able you are not going to get your perception, you are not going to get the information, is not it. So, mind is required for the perceptive process. Please see this point by point I am telling you what exactly is required for perception to be successful. If mind is elsewhere, you are looking, but there is no seeing. So, also with your other senses. So, mindfulness is an essential aspect of the perceptive process. Then do you perceive apart from the senses? In your everyday experience, do you perceive apart from the senses in your everyday experience? Do you perceive apart from the senses? Of course, your mentation, your ideation, your memory, all this is not the direct use of senses, but much of the information in all this was drawn from the senses. Do you also perceive apart from the senses anytime. Think and see. See every day you pass into three states, you go through three states, this just now you are in the waking state, you go into a dream state when you fall asleep, isn't it? And you go into a deep sleep state. In the dream state, you spin a world, you spin the world of your your dream creation. It is not externally there, it is not real by your standards, but you have spun it without the use of the senses. Just by the use of your memory you have spun a world and invested your awareness into it, you actually live the dream until you wake up, is not it? It is very real to you. Now, who lights up that dream? What is the light with which you see the dream? Is it this physical light? No. What light is that? Is the light of your awareness again the dream appears absolutely real although nothing there is there is no physical reality there and you have lit up that dream through your awareness that is why the dreamer self is called Tejasa, Tejomayatva Tejasa. In the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad there is a nice discussion on this, who lights up my dreams. So, please see this perceptions can be had at various levels and although you are the seat of the perceptive process, you can enhance, augment perception, you can blur perception, you can stop perception, you are at the helm of the entire perceptive process, what in you, this we will be studying in detail, when we go into subtler and subtler aspects of your own personality, you should remember remember jo hum internal perception kehte hai na when that is augmented that is what becomes yogi pratyaksha this is a word used in yogic sciences which means how do you know the atman how do you know the higher mind you know it through yogi pratyaksha iska matlab hai you have augmented awareness to a great extent that awareness is like a torch through which you just know. So, this is a possibility you remember that incident when Narendranath as a young lad like any of you as a teenager he first met Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa in Dakshineshwar he used to go around asking people Narendranath used to ask people have you seen God and nobody gave him a direct answer there are philosophers they were thinkers great people were there they would not give him a direct answer that yes I have seen God but when he came to Sri Ramakrishna and asked him this question immediately Sri Ramakrishna and asked him this question. Immediately Sri Ramakrishna said yes I have seen him as I see you and I can show him to you, but not in just in this sense in a more intense sense he said this. So, that intense sense is knowing by enhanced awareness augmented awareness. So, what this is we will come to this aspect of internal perception also. Let me tell you one more point on perception before I actually begin the process of perception. What determines the quality of your perception perceptions tell me? Sometimes you are full of an experience, it simply grabs your mind as it were, preoccupies your mind. Sometimes the experience it may be very intense a subject you are studying, but the mind is not sitting there. What determines the quality of your perception? You know to a great extent the clutter in your mind decides the quality of your perception, which means if there are very strong emotions in your mind, very strong ulterior motivations in your mind, it will affect the perceptive process. There is a common story which is told to demonstrate this. You know even Vivekananda used to tell this story. Suppose there is a garden in which there is a huge tree. Now, one day the tree was brought down and only the stump remained, the stump of that tree. But the people who used to visit that garden that park did not know that the tree was cut off and only the stump is there. So, when at dusk people went for walks. So, when they came there they just saw the stump of this tree and then did not know from where it came and they were just walking around. Now, different people came with different emotions in their minds. Like for example, some children came there and it was already dusk it was dark and they saw that stump at a distance and children have this fear of ghosts and all this you see. So, they thought oh something very eerie there and they ran away. A thief came there, he had just robbed somebody, he was hiding from the policeman outside. As soon as he saw the stump at a distance, it was already dark. So, he thought oh maybe the policeman is there, He ran away in the opposite direction. The policeman came there, he was in search of the thief. He thought maybe the dark thing there, that is the thief. What is dominant in their minds, they are seeing that. And then a lover comes there, waiting for his beloved. He thought that the girl is sitting there. A friend comes there, waiting for his beloved, he thought that the girl sitting there. A friend comes there waiting for his friend, he thinks that is the his friend there in the darkness. What emotion is dominant in the mind that is exactly their perception. Then one man came there who had absolutely a clear head nothing in his mind on his mind, no emotion. He saw the stump as the stump. Your perceptions are going to be decided by the emotions in your mind, they affect your perceptions. So, if you want direct perception, want to know something as it is, you must clear your mind. This holds good in a very deep way you know. Normal sensory perception you may not have that much of problem, but in the kind of perception which we are going to study clarity of mind is very important. If the mind is crystal clear, perception will occur just like that. So, remember this is another factor in augmenting perception. Now if the mind is cluttered too much it will even deflect knowledge, is not it, is not this true? So, now, let us go into the actual method of perception, how does it actually take place? See, you have to pay attention because it is not so simple a process, although it happens just like that you see now I am seeing this equipment, immediately I am having an experience of it, but the actual process involved. Let us see first what science tells us, what is the process of perception? See first of all you see a thing only by the light it throws out at you, is not this true? Your physics will tell you this. You are seeing that thing, now I am seeing that chair, it is red in color. It is actually throwing out red light, electromagnetic radiation in that particular range. So, it is appearing as red to me. It is not the light it is holding back, it is rejected light which I am perceiving as the color of the chair, right. Your physics will tell you this. If I could perceive the light it was holding back that would be the actual color of the chair, but I can never perceive that. I can only perceive the light it has rejected thrown back at me. You perceive anything only through the light it has rejected thrown back at me, you perceive anything only through the light it throws back at you. So, you see even in astronomy when you are perceiving a star, you are perceiving that star by the light it is it has thrown back at you, maybe that light left that star 1 million light years back. So, you are perceiving it as it was 1 million light years back that is why astronomy me hum kehate hain when you look deep into space you look back into time. You can only perceive a thing by the light it throws at you this is the first point you should know. Now, when that light is thrown at you, what happens? It goes into your visual apparatus, it enters your eye, there is an inverted image formed in your retina, an inverted image of that object carried by that electromagnetic radiation, ah this is the explanation of science. And that inverted image in your retina is further carried into your brain. That that information goes passes through the thalamus which acts like a filter and goes to your visual cortex, there you are getting an experience as it were of that object. Now please see electromagnetic radiation is photonic light photons it is colorless. When it enters your brain it is sparking of your neurochemistry electromagnetic radiation. Neurochemistry also is colorless, but your experience of the object is colorful, formful, you you see the object in 3D in real space and time. How does this happen? When the electromagnetic radiation is colorless formless, when your neurochemistry is colorless formless, but you experience the object. How does an impression which is nothing, but EMR become an experience to you? How does electromagnetic radiation become color to you? How does this happen? This is a huge gap which consciousness studies is trying to explore. This is a huge gap in science. How do I actually perceive the object as a 3 dimensional image in real space and time with so much of color you actually experience the beauty of this entire world you are experiencing it. You are not just catching the impression the light it is throwing out you are experiencing it you see the video camera which is tracking images that is also tracking the image and holding it in its memory it is not experiencing the object and holding it in its memory. It is not experiencing the object, isn't it? You are experiencing the object. So, awareness, self-awareness is required to experience a thing. Are you catching the point? Not just memory, self-awareness is required to experience. Finally, awareness is at the heart of experience, if you were not aware, if you were not self aware being you cannot experience the thing, just like how the video camera your mobile phone cannot experience anything, it can just hold the image for you. So, experience itself is possible because awareness is the very seat of your experience, the very heart of your experience. So, here where science stops, science is still exploring, Yoga Vedanta make a tremendous contribution here. They help you understand what is the role of mind and this awareness in the perceptive process. Science will give you the information from the object to the brain, how you are perceiving. From the brain to consciousness, Yoga Vedanta contribute immensely in our understanding how exactly we perceive, how the perceptive process takes place. So, let me show this to you on a slide. The first of all science, how does it explain the perceptive process? This you should see on a slide and then you see. First of all acknowledge this fact that experience is always in the first person right. Awareness is required to experience an object. I told you just now, if you are not a self aware entity you cannot experience you can just catch an image you cannot experience it. So, awareness is required for experience. So, experience is always in the first person. In science the perceptive process is like this. You see electromagnetic radiation entering look at the first image entering your eye goes to your brain the visual cortex in your brain through the thalamus and there it is interpreted as that particular object you are actually seeing the object such a huge object even this vast universe you can actually feel it you can see it. How does this happen in the brain? You know there is David Eagleman's documentary the brain, I do not know if any of you have seen it. It is worth seeing because he puts very Vedantic questions there, he asks how does the brain actually construct reality, what is involved in the perceptive process. So, here science will tell you basically now go to the next image see the next image you see the bird is the object there. Now, the light thrown out by that object enters and enters finally, enters your brain and the brain synthesizes this knowledge through recognition. So, memory also is involved usually in the perceptive process that this is a bird, from your eye it is going to your brain and finally, brain is experiencing the object and giving you the information this is a bird hm. So, this wonderful explanation science is giving us how it is happening. What all is involved in the perceptive process? First of all object of perception, then the light it has to throw out. If it did not throw out light, you would not perceive it even if it was there. Your black holes are like that, is not it? And if if it completely reflected off all the light, it would appear only white. If it did not reflect any light, it would appear dark. So, you determine the object by the light it throws at you. When it enters your eye, eye should be in proper functioning order. An inverted image is formed on your retina that in the form of electrochemical signals is going to your brain. So, electromagnetic radiation and neurochemistry both are involved and on your brain in the visual cortex you get an actual picture, you experience the object how nobody can tell right. This is the perceptive process which science tells us. Now, what has yoga the yogic sciences to add to this they give you a very important point here. See we just discussed attention is required for perception. So, where is mind here? Attention is a faculty of the mind, is not it? If you are not paying attention to something, you are not going to perceive it even if it is there. You are looking at it, but you are not seeing it. So, where does mind come into the picture? So, yoga will give you this answer perception takes place when the mind catches the object as it were mind is involved in this act of perception the mind the object as it were impinges on the mind, mind draws the object within within your system and it modifies according to the nature of that object. This modification is called a vritti, it is a very important concept in yoga, try to understand this. According to the object the mind modifies, vritti means a whirl, it modifies according to the object. And this mind is self aware, is not it? Awareness is already invested in the mind. So, this invested awareness technically it is called chidabhas which means mental awareness. You feel a sense of aliveness you see when you think, this mental awareness illumines this vritti. The mental awareness what is its source? It is reflected awareness, the source is the atman consciousness standing behind the mind, that consciousness gets reflected in the mind chidabhas is created which means mental awareness is generated that illumines this vritti and that is how you know the object. This is the explanation which yoga gives you. So, look at this image here you have the object and then the same process the it is going to the brain the light from the object and there mind becomes involved. See try to understand it like this the mind is the the brain is the physical template as it were of the mind, the brain is the hardware, mind is the software. So, the essential process is happening in the mind, because the mind draws the object and modifies itself according to the object, creates the vritti. Now, if this impression is very deep, it translates neurophysiologically into an engram in your brain. It is a sort of a h on your brain due to the perceptive process, due to the repetition of that. And as a result what happens? This the vritti in the mind is illumined by consciousness, by awareness and as a result you feel you know that object. So, they work in coordination, the brain, mind, awareness. So, immediately you feel you have perceived that object, you know that object. So, this is the yogic explanation. Now what are the extra factors involved here? Mind is involved, faculty of attention is involved, all this science is not explaining is not it? The creation of vritti, the illumination of that vritti through the chidabhas, through awareness and thus you know. So, this is the yoga on perception, the yogic process on perception. Now, the important things to note here is, we all know mind is absolutely required for perception, is not it? Without mind you cannot perceive. If you are mindless at some particular moment, maybe you dozed off during a class, you are not going to see what is happening, you are not going to feel or experience anything there hm. Mind what exactly happens with the mind, this is the explanation here. And I told you at the heart of the perceptive process is consciousness, because your real nature is consciousness that got reflected into in the mind and became the the the sense of aliveness as it were which you feel in the mind. The mental awareness which you generally feel which accompanies thought which makes your thoughts things for you as it were you experience your thoughts, that mental awareness, these are the factors which are absolutely required for the perceptive process according to yoga. That is why you actually get the experience of the object right within you, you are experiencing everything where? Within you, please see, the object may be outside of you, but you are experiencing it where? Within you, you do not experience it there, you experience it right within you. And this is that is why yoga will bring in mind it will brings in awareness and gives you the an additional something added to science as to how perception is taking place. Now, Vedanta will add something more to this. Just observe these points at some point it will click yes this can be a perfect possibility this is what must be happening. What Vedanta will tell you is it points to something very obvious Vedanta will tell you you see where is the perceptive process occurring, it is occurring in your awareness. Apart from your awareness there is no perception, is not it? Things can be outside your skin, they are not outside your awareness, right. So, your awareness as it were encapsulates the entire perceptive process subject and object are in awareness. Subject is subject only with respect to object, everything is an appearance in your awareness. Fundamental fact about perception is it is because you are aware that you are perceiving. So, perception is happening in awareness, it is not outside your awareness. So, this is the diagram which we can give you for Advaita Vedanta on perception you see consciousness is essentially doing the entire perceptive process. Entire perception takes place in your awareness Object and subject are nothing, but appearances in your awareness. This is what they are adding to the perceptive process. Now notice a few points carefully hm. See if I show you a simple let me take an example to help you understand this. Suppose you have you have clicked your selfie and you are watching your selfie, what is watching what? Tell me now you must start speaking in a little Vedantic language. Who is watching what when you are watching your selfie on your mobile, your mind is watching your body right and your intellect is interpreting the whole thing, the intellect is seeing your mind watching your body, but this whole process is taking place in your awareness, is not it. Because you are aware, your intellect is watching your mind, watching your body. The simple perception of your selfie is in your awareness. This is what we mean when we say awareness is required for the entire perceptive process. It is taking place in awareness. That is why subject and object are appearances in your awareness. See I can say color for example, it is an appearance of electromagnetic radiation I can say that is not it. It is not wrong to say that even scientifically it is true. Color is nothing, but an appearance of a electromagnetic radiation. So, also the entire object is an appearance in your consciousness because consciousness is the very seat of your experience and it is in consciousness that you perceive. So, at the heart of the perception process lies consciousness, you can never fully explain perception without explaining consciousness that is why. We are half way through when we try to explain perception without bringing in mind and consciousness. So, this is the entire thing about the process of perception which you should know. Now few more points I would like to dwell upon here, so that you understand it very scientifically. See first of all I told you since your mind and awareness is involved in the perception process, if you want to increase your perceptions, what will you increase? Think and tell me. Just like how external perception is augmented by the gadgets you have invented, right, your telescope and microscope, your simple glasses are augmenting your external perceptions. Internal perceptions can be augmented by what? If these are the factors involved for perception, if you are able to enhance the capacity of your mind, clarify the mind, your perception should increase, is not it? So, this is one yogic process, what is called emptying mind, clarifying the mind, removing the unnecessary clutter, clearing up the mind, will increase, enhance your perceptions. Then, if you can increase that chidabhas, the level of mental awareness, this is also a yogic technique, vipassana jo kehte hai na, it works with all this. So, you can enhance your mental awareness, you know this experience is the most beautiful experience you can have. Just now, the amount of aliveness you feel, if you felt double that amount of aliveness, how would you feel, if you felt double that amount of aliveness, how would you feel? You would feel far more happier, life is far more beautiful, every experience will just hit you, because your mental awareness has enhanced, you have become intensely aware, profoundly aware. So, by increasing your mental awareness you enhance your perceptions and the third most important point is if you go directly to the source you can perceive the very seat of your perception, the seat of your experience which is what which is the actual aim of self-realization or Vedant to know the source of my experience to know the self to know the Atman. So, there are ways to do this aisa mat samjhe ki how do we have techniques you see we have 9 hours of theory in this particular course more than 9 hours of theory actually. So, I am taking you step by step through these processes, but these are actually meant to be practiced through meditation, because as I said culturing awareness, enhancing the mental awareness in your mind, removing the clutter from your mind, these are all meditative processes through meditation you actually achieve them. Abhi, you just now you hear the theory, you you should know that this can be done, then gradually you should practice it little little by little. If you just clear your mind, you can very clearly see how your perceptive process just blossoms beyond your imagination. If you just clear the mind of unnecessary thought unnecessary emotion negative emotions if you just clear your mind of all that you can see anything you perceive affects you deeply a simple tree a simple leaf of a tree can give you immense happiness ye dekha hai aapne jeevan mein kabhi kabhi yeh happens in life A beautiful sunset and sunrise can put you into very high states of mind because mind is so clear mind has become so clear awareness, mental awareness has naturally augmented So see, in the life of great men like in the life of Vivekananda or Sri Ram Krishna simple things would put them into Samadhi. Sri Ramakrishna's life if you have read you will see this. Why? Mind has become so sensitive. They have augmented awareness to such an extent hardly a stimulus is required to put them into that supreme state. So by enhancing your awareness content you enhance your perceptions right and the second process is if you just wake up to reality as I told you you seek the source of this mental awareness which is consciousness that is the Vedantic way developing the Dhi to such an extent it just awakens to the truth. These are two ways which I would like to illustrate you through through the medium of two stories because this is such a high level knowledge unless you have something to relate with through stories it will become a little difficult for you to understand. Dekhe yog kaise kaam karta hai? How does yoga work? I will tell you in the form of a story. There was once a king and he was very proud of his splendor and his achievements and that is why he used to tell his court poets to sing his glories, to sing about him, talk about him. He was a vain king. Now, one of his very wise courtiers told him, my lord he alone is worth praise who has conquered himself not merely conquered the external, but who has conquered his own mind and the king said what are you talking about? Then he said do you find any people like that and then the courtier said yes. In fact, we have a sage quite close to our kingdom he has the epithet means people say he is a one who has conquered a thousand elephants that strength he has because his mind is completely under his control. Then the king said I do not believe all this Let me go and see anyway what you are talking about So he went with his courtiers, he went with a thousand soldiers to find out if that sage is really like that So what happened, they all went and sat around this sage This sage was sitting under a tree in his ashram and there the other rishis came and told him, do not disturb him, this is his time for meditation, you all sit here, sit here and you can watch him. So, they sat around this yogi, this great sage and then after what happened is he he had his eyes closed. So, he did not even notice that they had come. Then he went into his meditation. As soon as he went into his meditative states, a deep calmness came over all of them. All their minds which had come with anger and arrogance and pride, somehow they became very calm and they felt that calmness as a serene form of happiness. So, they were very happy sitting there like children and they also close their eyes then this sage this yogi he entered into the state of Samadhi which means mind stopped mind stopped awareness is completely there it's a see apparently from the outside Samadhi may appear like an unconscious state deep within there is full consciousness mind has been arrested. So, when he entered into this state you know what happened to all of them their mind their thought process also stopped. This is the power of realization their thoughts also stopped yet they are fully conscious, fully aware. So they thought what kind of a state is this, what kind of power is in this mind. Then after long time this yogi came out of his samadhi and immediately they saw that their minds also now started moving. The mind had become unmoving and it started moving, moving in the sense thinking and thought started coming in, then they realized they were sitting here in front of the sage and a happy mood prevailed, then in this a kind of a supremely peaceful state the yogi came into normal awareness, normal consciousness and then he greeted the king and asked him when did he come why he has come and the king stood up and told him I have nothing more to tell you when your mind went into meditation all our minds calm down a thousand minds came to a standstill and when you went into the state of Samadhi we experienced something of that state we experienced the state of full blown consciousness within so you have been able you are really fit for this epithet that you can control a thousand elephants because the mind Madahasti they say it is like a mad elephant you are able to control that mind if you can control it in your system you get the capacity to control it in other minds you are you are able to control other minds so this capacity we found in you so indeed you alone are fit to be worshipped and praised saying this the king and his retinue went back in great joy because they had tasted some genuine original bliss not the synthetic joys of life. Synthetic joys means joys based on objects, original joy means the joy that you get from within. So, this is a capacity of the human mind you see you can enhance perception just by training your mind in the yoga sutras you have this fourth sutra which tells you what happens when you stop mind activity tada drashtu swaroopya avasthanam, the witnessing awareness will go back to its source, it will go back to its original, it will stabilize itself in its original state, this is the actual yoga avastha, the ability of this system to usher your mind into its original state. Then only you can understand that concentration, attention, clarity all these are not very big things. You can attain them if you on a daily basis touch these higher states, they are your natural states of mind and that is why achievement, success all that follows such elevated states of mind, they are perfect possibilities with you, you do not have to struggle your mind with your mind unnecessarily by getting wrong attitudes, wrong motivations, wrong exposures. If you if you practice a little yoga control at these levels you will see the mind will function like an actual instrument to take you wherever you want to go, it is your best friend. In the Bhagavad Gita this is how the mind is described you know it is either your best friend or your worst enemy depends on you whether you make your mind your best friend or your worst enemy if you give it good food it will become your best friend you give it bad food it will become your enemy what is that food sense impression sense intake and the thoughts you think so apke haath mein hai you are in the helm of change you can do in with your life whatever you want to do because your mind is your mind you can make the changes required. So, this is one way to enhance and augment your perceptions. The second way is the way of Vedant. What Vedant tells you is you just awaken yourself to reality there is no particular process. See when you wake up is there a process to waking up when you wake up early in the morning, is there a process to waking up, you just you were asleep and you wake up after sometime. So also this Dhi in a in the human being this higher faculty of intuition, this is the highest form of intelligence actually, we will just wake up the mind to the reality of the self. And this also is illustrated through a story which I will tell you. See please observe this story, it has something very important to teach us. There was a classroom of primary school children and the teacher of this classroom she was a lady who was quite old in years which means she was close to retirement she knew the ways of little children and so she was a master story teller. So one day she gathered all the children she wanted to drive home a very important point so she started telling them a story she told them all the children 6, 7 years old sitting around her and she started telling them look my children I am going to tell you a story. Now you start your imagination, start imagining you today when you went home from school you had your you played and you studied, then you had your supper and then you fell asleep. In that sleep you had a dream. Now imagine in that dream you went to the zoo. You went to the zoo with all your friends and your parents are also there and you enjoyed yourself, you ate popcorn and you ate cotton candy and then you started visiting all the animals in the zoo. You saw the rabbits, you saw the peacocks, you saw the birds, you saw the deer, you were so delighted and laughing and playing with your friends. Then you slowly came to the huge cages where there were wild animals. She is explaining to the children and the children became very alert. So, you came to the cage of the tiger, there is this huge tiger ferociously moving about in his cage because he is caged and it is a very huge cage, a metal cage, but the tiger is so ferocious and so huge, if he just laps the cage, the cage is shaking, it is such a huge tiger and looking at that ferocious beast you got frightened and as you moved forward the tiger also moved in his cage. When you went towards the edge of the cage the tiger also is going there, when you moved back the tiger also moved back. Now the children were really fearful as she was describing the tiger and the tiger is directly looking at you. Now, it so happened that this cage which was huge had its top open, because it was such a huge cage it was expected that the tiger is not going to come out of it, but it so happened that the tiger stuck the cage with full might because he was very hungry and the cage suffered a dent. In that dent, the tiger suddenly managed to leap out. He leapt out of the cage and the next thing you knew was you were screaming and running, running away and all your friends were screaming and running away because the cage is now out of the, the tiger is now out of his cage and you just look behind like this and you see the K, the tiger is chasing you and you run as fast as you can and then suddenly to your great horror you find a cold paw falling on you and you turn back and see this horrific sight of the tiger upon you and with its terrible face and you are half dead already and you are screaming, but even the voice you are so terribly scared and the you face this terrible situation of being eaten alive while you are fully conscious. Now, my children the children had all turned red by this time. What would you do in this condition? The teacher is asking the students and one little boy stood up and said, madam I will punch the tiger in the nose and then another little boy stood up and said, madam I will kick the tiger out and another little child said I will scream to my mummy she must be somewhere close by she will come to help me one little smart girl suddenly stood up and said madam I would just wake up remember it was a dream she started with in your dream you went to the zoo so the girl said madam I would just wake up that is the answer that is the solution to this problem if you just wake up to reality you don't need to defend or solve your problems in any way there are no problems it was all part of the dream you do not need to punch the tiger or kick the tiger out if you just awaken to the truth of consciousness pure being your mental problems you will see them as something hazy dreamy you will get the power to solve them just like that you don't give things the importance they don't deserve because you have awakened to the heart of reality the reality about your mind itself about your perception itself so this is the vedantic process of waking up to reality just like how when you wake up in the morning you don't explain or try to find a solution to your dream so also when you wake up to the reality of consciousness you do not try to find an explanation to the world of problems you give it its place. So this is the second way to come at perfect perception, you just wake up to reality. So, these are all the common ways given to us through these philosophies by which you can enhance, augment your perception means actually seeing, you are augmenting your sight, augmenting your knowledge, you wake up to the heart of reality or you clarify your mind. You can also combine the two processes because one is giving you a method and does not talk much about the goal. Yoga gives you a solid method, it is a methodology actually and does not talk too much about the goal. Vedanta gives talks about the goal, but may not give you a method. Although yes, there are Vedantic meditation techniques also upasanas they are called vidyas they are called, but what I am saying is you can combine the two also the yogic and Vedantic process. So, the thing is this perception has to be augmented and brought to its full fruition, then you will know reality as it is whether it is external perception or internal perception. The extent to which you develop yourself your perceptions will be clearer right hm and if your perception is the clearest, you will know reality as it is. Epistemology leads to ontology that is why, leads to the very heart of truth, the method which you adopt, the method of knowledge which you adopt. So, here we have studied only perception, like this there are many pramanas, many means of knowledge, but your perceptions have to be refined and augmented for you to perceive reality. Just now when we say kaha hai satya mujhe kyu nahi dikhaya dera why do I not know this the simple reason is your perception has not augmented to that level your mind is still not ready for that level. Your mind is still not ready for that truth. So, make it ready, there are processes, there are ways and you will get that truth in your own life. You see, spirituality is a totally experiential thing. It is a do it yourself thing. It is no theory. There is no theory actually. Yoga is a process of which it is something which happens in your system. So, if you train the system well, you can get the experience you want. Let me sum up for you what we studied today's class in the perception process. First is perception is the means of knowledge, means to know something. Second thing is perceptions can be external or internal. Perceptions can be augmented. Perceptions require the presence of the mind, right. Mind activity, you must know mind in order to perceive best. The more you clear your mind mind the better your perceptions. Then we went into the perceptive process in science, what science has to say about it and what yoga has to say about it, what Vedanta has to say about it. Finally we come to this conclusion, awareness, consciousness is at the heart of perception and it is using the instrumentality of the mind and the brain and your sense organs to perceive sense objects which appear to be outside. They are outside your skin not outside your awareness. Our simple fallacy is what we think we are limited by the skin. Whatever is inside this is me, whatever is outside this is not me. Okay, whatever is inside this is the body, but in your mind there are no such limits. In your awareness there are absolutely no limits. Mind still has the epistemic limits of time, space and causation, but in awareness there are absolutely known limits, mind still has the epistemic limits of time space and causation, but in awareness there are absolutely no limits. So, there is one seamless reality in which the subject and the objects are appearances. Even as the different colors of vibgur are appearances of electromagnetic radiation, is not it? Any science you penetrate into it, it will give you its foundation in unity. When science reach reaches its climax, it perceives a unity. So also the perceptive science, it its unity lies in consciousness. Because of the presence of consciousness, you are conscious there is perception that is the heart of the perceptive process let me give you one or two more points here before I conclude in our culture many times you know gods and goddesses are also portrayed as having three eyes isn't it? Why three eyes? Why do they have three eyes? How can anybody have three eyes? What do they mean by that? You see it's a culture which is trying to give you very important concepts through all this kind of imagery. Third eye means he is perceiving something more than what we can perceive. He has augmented his perception. He is the master yogi, he is yogishwara. That is why he is three eyed. So, developing the third eye and all this means it is a figurative way of saying you must enhance augment your perceptions go to go into a process which will help you do this the Buddha nature you know in Buddhism how it is explained what is the nature of the Buddha it is so clear you see it is so beautiful Buddha nature is simply your flawless present awareness cognizant and empty naked and awake that is the Buddha consciousness it is your very own awareness augmented in its real original state it is not another being you see this very being the human being becomes the Buddha if you reach that level of perception Raman Maharshi you know he used to say there is no mistaking consciousness when it is pure what a remarkable sentence this is consciousness is the most obvious thing when it is pure if it is mixed up with mind activity then you have all problems it deflects your knowledge but the thing in itself is not difficult that is why when when Kant said you know Vivekananda had studied a lot of Western philosophy when Kant said the thing in itself is not difficult that is why when when Kant said you know Vivekananda had studied a lot of western philosophy when Kant said the thing in itself cannot be known but our Upanishads say the thing in itself can be known there are methods to know it and that's why Vivekananda said where Kant ends Vedanta begins so here you have a very profound system of thought, a very profound philosophy which is giving you ways to augment your perceptions, so that you augment your life. Because as I told you your life whatever you are calling life, if it flowers by itself, if it blossoms by itself completely into full awareness, your happiness is 100 percent guaranteed by yourself. If you are only half alive, which means not fully aware at all, you require objects to keep you alive and aware. And if you are totally unaware, you require drinks and drugs to pep you up your levels of awareness is determined your levels of happiness is determined by how aware you are within yourself if you are fully alive fully aware you don't need an object to keep you happy you don't need anybody to keep you happy you are just bubbling with joy to the extent you work on yourself enhance your awareness as yoga is meant for that Vedanta is meant for this to the extent you do this not only your perceptions of everything become clear by yourself you are all satiated, supremely happy, nothing else is required to bring into your life joy, ecstasy, happiness, otherwise a thousand things, a seven-figure salary will not keep you happy, the mind will still be greeding for something else, this is the nature of life so you must understand all these basic things right now I'm not telling you don't aim at the good things of life aim at them but you must know basically this is what happened what is happening with the human psychology yoga and Vedanta methods for you to introduce yourself your own mind to the higher aspects of your being. Once you get them, once you are able to experience them by yourself, you discount in a way you can do without a whole lot of things in your life and yet stay supremely happy. You are not their slave, that is the basic thing. You have it in your life, but you are not a slave to that thing. You can very well do without it. So, your entire life is in your hands. Your happiness is in your hands, not in the hands of somebody. Isn't it? If today you need somebody to keep you happy, when that person changes, your happiness also will change. But if you are the source and origin of your happiness, you are the beauty of life is in your hands. So, this possibility is open to the human experience to the human being through a little practice of these things. The purpose of studying perception is this, your means of knowledge, your means for happiness can be cleared, can be augmented and you can get the highest blessings of life by yourself, through yourself not through a belief system, not through somebody, through yourself uddharet tmana tmnam na tmnam avasdhayet the message of the Bhagavad Gita is this, you elevate yourself by yourself, don't reduce yourself to something stupid by yourself, elevate yourself by yourself, you are perfectly capable of doing it. So let us stop today's lecture here, tomorrow's lecture is connected to this because we are going to go into self-d self discovery through the perceptive process. We will stop it here today.

 Music Om Asato Maa Sadgamaya Tamaso Maa Jyotir Gamaya Today we are going to study techniques of mind management which will be practically very useful to you. Mind as you have been studying is the primary instrument of perception. Mind is the instrument of interpretation. Mind is what makes you experience life. Mind is the cause for your happiness, whatever experience of life. So, that is why in it is given the greatest importance, especially in the Indian philosophical systems, they are all about study of mind and beyond mind what is there or rather the substratum of the mind. So, it is a study into this that is why the mind is called antahkaran, the inner instrument. It is basically philosophically speaking, it is nothing but subtle matter, it is an evolute of prakriti. You remember in the first class we discussed the Sankhya concept. So yoga, Vedanta everything borrows the Sankhya psychology. It is nothing but prakriti that is why it is ever changing. It feeds on outer objects because it is subtle matter, it correlates, corresponds with the external representation of matter and it feeds on outer matter and changes, modifies accordingly. It is a set of variables that is why, it is in constant flux that is why it is so difficult to control. So, but this very mind is your link with the body and with the self. Because you see it is through your thoughts that you can even change the structure of your brain what we call neuroplasticity. You can you can do that with your thoughts, it is through your thinking proper thinking right thinking that you change the neural pathways in your brain. the mind affects the body so much. So, the link with the body is due to mind and with yourself also how do you have self knowledge? It is when you penetrate into the very source of your mind through the mind, through the process of enquiry then you come to the knowledge of that which is the very basis of the mind what you are calling the antahkaran. So, the mind is so very important I do not have to tell you the importance of mind management and this is a topic which is so popular nowadays because of this basic fact that our mind is somehow we do not have enough knowledge of it and it is not in our hands that is why all all our problems are actually due to that. See what happens in the external world, if I have a very mature response towards it I will not suffer too much from anything negative happening in the external world, but if my response is in the form of an explosive reaction then it is very difficult for me to handle any situation outside. That is why we have we need to have study mind management techniques. So, that is what we will be doing today. The great advantage of this age is you see we are such an empowered generation today. In fact, the most empowered generation on this planet which ever was because you have such a enormous communication technology right in your hands. You can get knowledge of anything whenever you want, but still the whole problem is with so much of data available to us, so many knowledge systems available to us, we are not able to control our minds. We are on compulsive mode most of the time, thought is just happening as I told you external things, external gadgets are controlling our life. Right from the time you get up watch and see in your own life, you need an alarm clock to get up, as soon as you get up you need coffee to prep you up, then maybe you turn straight towards Facebook or Twitter or whatever, you start your communication with the outer world, you have hardly spent time even with your mind not to speak of the self. So, due to all these factors finally, the whole day goes like that in texting, in communication with the external, in taking in knowledge from there. So, that dominates your mental field entirely and finally, you you ah even the attention is affected by that the focus is affected by that finally, you want getaways after long period of all this. So, what happens is you are trying to escape from the normal workings of your mind. So, because this has become so common you you know when we were young we had heard of something called midlife crisis which means towards the age of 45 40 40 to 50 people it seems go through a period of crisis when because they have already experienced all that life has to offer and there is nothing new. So, they may go through a period of crisis, but today that line has come down to 25 years. It is called quarter life crisis today in today's modern world, because you experience a whole lot of things right till the age of 25 you have finished with that experience, then what more the the mind is in deep boredom and frustration and depression, it has nothing more to explore. So, this state of affairs is simply because we have not learnt to handle our minds, which is the most important instrument we should have learnt to handle, because whether you like it or not you live with your mind, you live in your mind and your thoughts are creating your experience of life. So, this the science of this the study of this has been given the greatest importance in our philosophies and they have also decided upon a few things which means if you track the source of your mind, you learn to control it as an instrument. If you learn to control it, you learn to control your life. It is a it is a graded process to do it and there is a way to do it, there are solid techniques which help you do it. So, basic understanding of mind is required for every person, it it should be part of education not that you educate yourself only with regard to the external things and the internal world is just dark for you. No, it does not make any sense to you if you close your eyes you get frightened because you do not know what is happening. So, this should not be the situation since I am functioning through this instrument I must know everything about it is not it. So, that is why we are going to go a little into mind management and its techniques. You see the the yogic sciences give you what is called the functional classification of the mind. How does your mind function? Another name for mind is chittam, because it reflects the chit the consciousness aspect and becomes conscious, because it becomes conscious it gives you conscious experiences in the world. This we have discussed earlier how is it that you experience an object not just that you are seeing it, not that it is falling passively on your brain, you are experiencing it through that perception. This is only possible because you are a conscious being, there is awareness in you, this is making you experience the object. So, at the heart of experience again is awareness, experience is always in the first person. So, the functioning of the mind has to be understood that is why what are the functional aspects of the mind. It is called chittam essentially because it reflects consciousness and gives you the conscious experience, it has other functions also like the what is called manas that is the cogitative aspect. See the definition of manas is interesting in Sanskrit sankalpa vikalptmika antahkaraavtti it is the same antahkaraavtti which is sankalpa vikalpatmika which means which is cogitative which is considering the pros and cons of something. See you are constantly in that state in the state of sort of thinking through all angles in all ways bringing in all kinds of data. So, this cogitative aspect is constantly taking in data from the outside and working on it. And if you are able to process that data well and keep the mind relatively balanced during its entire functioning, then you will come to a decision about that data. So, it goes to the next aspect. But to say something more about this manas aspect, you see you can make this manas either a gold mine or a rubbish heap depending on the kind of data you take in. To a great extent your thought is determined by your senses, sense input. So, my manas will function according to that sense input. So, it can it can become a gold mine, if I take in very sattvic things my mind will become sattvic aahar shuddho sattva shuddhi aapne suna hoga what aahar aahar is not just what you eat what you take in through your senses agar wo sattvic ho the mind becomes sattvic so please see what kind of aahar you are taking, what you take in through your eyes also is aahar, what you take in through your ears also is aahar. You take in good stuff, the mind will function in a particular order. You process that information well it will go to the next level what is called buddhi, which means that is the determinative the most important aspect of your mind. It is the faculty of determination, it is called nishchayatmika antahkarna vritti, you come to a particular conclusion through your discretion, through your discrimination and that is when you call it the buddhi that very same antahkaran has got modified into the buddhi. It is a knife like tool which helps you take decisions and you can hone that knife sharpen it or you can make it blunt. This knife has to be tempered by emotional intelligence so that it is it just does not chop down everything. It is able to know how much to dissect, what to dissect. If emotional intelligence does not develop along with your rational analytical intelligence, there will be a lopsided development of this intelligence. So, EQ and IQ should go hand in hand. You have enough training for IQ, you do not have enough training for EQ, emotional intelligence. In In the past your culture gave you the tools required to train your EQ in the form of cultural values, cultural standards, some of these practices like bhakti and all this. This trains your emotions in a way, elevates your emotions, gives you a higher bigger slice of life. So, if you do not have these tools available to you just now, you must manufacture them. You must bring them into your life through a little effort and hone your emotional intelligence, become skillful in that and then when you combine the two, I told you your intelligence will simply move to the next dimension. It will simply unfold itself, otherwise it will go on cutting everything you know slicing up everything. So, this is the importance of this discriminative faculty all these are remember mind is a set of variables, they can be changed according to your understanding as you develop more maturity more understanding you can use each of these faculties as a very powerful tool. The mind is the most powerful instrument in the world which is in your hands. So, see how you are going to use it. This is regarding the buddhi the determinative faculty of your mind. Then you have a third faculty which is called aham aham atmika it is your ego sense that which says I within you the I sense it is typically called the ahankar isn't it ahankar it appears like egoism the translation, but actually it is your identity your sense of identity is due to what? Ego is a a shadow of the real self. So, what you consider yourself to be, what you consider yourself to be, the whole mind will be functioning according to that, that consideration. This identity you know there are certain very fundamental things you should know about it. See, identity in a very still mind, you will see there is no sense of identity other than the fact of what you are which is awareness. But when the mind is agitated, when the mind is functioning in a particular way, the tendency of the thought process what you are calling mind is to identify to join with something. So, we have built up identities just now you are a student of IIT, it is a built up identity after sometime it is going to change. I am an Indian it is a built up identity, we are building identities constantly and then your entire mind will keep defending those identities because you have built them up, you have invested energy into them, you have identified with that particular aspect at that point of time. In a completely still meditative mind if you explore identity you will come to the very source of these faculties. What is the source of your eye sense which is pure awareness, pure consciousness what we say that is getting reflected in the mind, creating your mental awareness that is identifying with the thought process in your mind. So, you are building an identity, you are getting an identity as it were. So, this understanding will come by itself if we manufacture the meditative mind, you understand the very you can say crux of identity essentially Vedanta does this for you. So, this is regarding that ahamatmika faculty of your mind which is constantly in identification you can even identify with objects do not people identify with their homes with their money with their property with their cars, with their money, with their property, with their cars hm. See everybody is doing it, then at the next level you identify with your research, you identify with your titles, with your qualification. At another level you identify with your awards, with your family. You see it is a constant identification. Sometimes the identifications change, they can be modified, but you are constantly the eye is attaching itself to something or the other and your whole mind will keep defending that identity until you explore the very basis of this identity eye sense in us. Then again all of the all of this becomes an external objective thought process which you can identify or which you need not identify with, this is entirely your choice. So, you are not under the weight of this identity, you get it, mind control aisa hi hota hai, you understand some of the basic facts about your mind this is actually the science of consciousness please see this you understand actually how you are experiencing life before you jump and identify with something and fight for it and you know people will go mad about their identities but how true is your identity? Have you seen it closely? So, try to understand it. We those of you who have taken this Vedanta course, you must see things at a deeper level. Every aspect of life I see it at a deeper level, closely I watch it and see for what it is. So, mind management includes all of this, each of your faculties how you are able to manage. Once you understand these basic facts about yourself, you will see it will show in your responses, it will show in your understanding, it will show in your behavior finally. So, these are the aspects functional aspects of your mind which you should know. Then there are the structural aspects of your mind which means how does your mind function? At the conscious level you may say, but the conscious mind is only a very small strip of your personality. A large subconscious is there under the conscious which you are not always conscious of, it pops up in your dreams, it pops up when you do not expect it to come up. A subconscious mind you may feel when had I thought about this suddenly how did it come up in my mind. So, I had shown you once there is a diagram to this that what you consciously think for a long period of time can go into your subconscious and lodge itself there and after some time come into your conscious plane again as memory. So, the subconscious mind is the repository of your memories, what will become your memory again in the conscious mind. It is a repository of your tendencies, your habits, your sanskars, mental impressions, whatever you have taken in through the senses into your conscious mind, it will be held in your subconscious mind. So, this is there this huge portion which you are not conscious of just now, but it is an essential part of your mind. Then there is also an unconscious portion which you know nothing about. So, this is regarding the structural the more you make your mind conscious, the more you will understand this subconscious and unconscious. That is why we tell you yoga is primarily about becoming more and more conscious. If energy is stuck up in your subconscious and unconscious, you do not even know what is going on. Some tendency is coming and overpowering you, some emotion is coming and overpowering you and you are helpless like a slave. You see if whenever they have interviewed criminals, this is what this is the answer they give I was helpless in that state, some force made me do this. So, ye kyun ho rha hai because of the simple fact the the subconscious and unconscious is full of all sorts of rubbish which he has never explored explored or cleared up the conscious mind is a very small strip, but you can make it more and more conscious you can bring the conscious mind to the forefront, unravel and draw the energies from the subconscious and unconscious, bring everything into the forefront of the conscious plane. This is the way to regulate your life, then you are in charge of your mind completely, you are in charge of your thought, your emotion, your will, your attitudes and motivations, all of your faculties. This is the way to bring the mind under control. Otherwise, well, it is all hidden in the depths of your subconscious and you do not know what is happening. Why something is happening in my mind, I do not know. So, this is a very, you know, it is a, it is like mind becoming matter if you are living like that. It is something you are not at all in charge of. If you are not conscious, you are not in charge. If you are not conscious, you are not even awake. If you are not awake, you are not alive. You are half dead already. So please understand this, the whole secret lies in consciousness. The more you make yourself conscious, the more you become alive and through that consciousness you are going to experience life so much the better. See if your present state of awareness only is doubled, how will be your will be your experience of life? So, this is the meaning of making the mind more and more conscious, awakening it up. This is possible, perfectly possible we will be giving you techniques for this today and along with this you should understand the basic fact that the human experience is meant to be lived consciously. The conscious mind is the intelligent mind please see this, otherwise your intelligence is all blocked, it does not exist primarily if it is all only subconscious and unconscious. If it if it has come to the conscious plane, if you have awakened to consciousness basically more and more awareness then intelligence will just peak in your experience if you read the lives of people like Vivekananda you will see even reading a page you know Swamiji would just see it Vivekananda would see it and the entire information he didn't have to go line by line even the entire information gets soaked into his brain and he cannot forget it ye sharpness kaha se aata hai the entire information gets soaked into his brain and he cannot forget it The mind is fully awake, please see this the way to increase your intelligence is bring your conscious life to the forefront, awaken yourself deep within yourself first so yoga is is the technique to do this, the way to do this. That is why it is always complementary to the educational process. Do not think this is some special course. This is part and parcel of the educational process. If you want to succeed in life, you must have your mind in your hands and you will succeed in anything you want. Otherwise external factors will determine how much you will succeed. So, let me start with the techniques of mind management. The first technique, see you have to pay attention to this, otherwise you will miss the vital points, because I will go on telling one after the other these techniques. The first technique which I have already discussed with you is to a certain extent objectifying the thought process is a way is the primary technique of mind management, which means what anything happening in my mind I have the capacity for what is called metacognition. I do not just cognize, I can think about it later on, I can work on it later on, I can think about my thinking from all possible angles. My thought process has become objective to my experience. This is the primary way to control your thought process. If you are absolutely identified with something like for example, I let me give you an example, a friend came and told you so and so, whose another friend of yours is very angry on you and talking behind you. Now, if at once you explode hearing this information, you cannot control any situation anywhere. But if you give it more thought, objectify it, do not identify with that process, objectify it, you can control it so much better, you can go and talk with that person, you can solve the problem whatever problem is there, is not it, you will not explode at all. But if your thought process is not objective, just a bit of information and it can cause a lot of mischief, is not it? Isi liye kehate hain, you must be distanced to a certain extent from everything that is happening in your mind. The only way to achieve this is to fix your attention on that which is behind your thought at least for 5 minutes daily that externalizes the thought process automatically. If you manufacture a calm mind because calmness is the substratum of your thought process because awareness is the basic foundation of your thought, if you daily take a dip into that, the thought process becomes external to your perception. So, you can handle it, it is that easy. Otherwise, you never know in what situation how you will react and what you will create. Hai na? Ye technique samajh mein aaya aapko, it is easy, but it requires practice. Another technique is to enhance your awareness. Ab ye kaise karte hain? if the mind is more aware than identified you can easily control it mind management is easy how do you do this? see the basic yogic process I will mention here but again without practice it won't make much sense to you how do you change your awareness? For most people the only awareness they know of is body consciousness and mind con they are conscious of their thoughts, they are conscious of their body. Now yoga has a very powerful method to change this state, what they tell you is, see you might have heard of the term chakras, do not think it is something mystical. What they are telling you is in very scientific language I will put it, there are junction points in your body where you can concentrate vital energy, the energy that you feel within your body you can concentrate it through the power of your attention at certain junction points. If you concentrate this energy only at the lower junction points which are Muladhara, Swadhisthana and Manipuraka only body consciousness will prevail in your mind. If you lift that energy to the anahata at least to the heart center, how do you lift that energy to the anahata, at least to the heart center, how do you lift that energy? Through the power of your attention, which means keeping the mind in the heart. If you fix your attention in the heart, lift your energy there consciously, body consciousness drops. You are just aware of everything going on, awareness peaks, but not with body consciousness, body consciousness will drop automatically. So, anything that you are thinking about whether it is science, whether it is Vedanta, whether it is some new discovery research whatever you are thinking about at which plane you are thinking becomes important. If your vital energies are sort of only travelling along the lower planes, your entire science will only be committed towards achieving more pleasures for the body because you are only body conscious, your sense of yourself is only the body. So, you will use that science only to bring more pleasure to your body. If you have gone to the heart center or above that anything that you think of or research into you will use it for that particular level of development, for that particular awareness, for that particular unfolding of that intelligence. For example, yogis and rishis because they are they have committed their vital energies to the heart, they become so very compassionate, their intelligence becomes all inclusive. Because of the simple fact that they have identified themselves with the essence of their being not merely with the body. So, see this this is a yogic process which is telling you where you commit your vital energy according to that your awareness unfolds. Higher the commitment of vital energy, the higher it will be your sense of yourself and the you will function accordingly, when your sense of yourself is something else you know when you are far above body consciousness, when you have developed the intelligence to understand awareness is the source of my being and that same awareness is manifested in different bodies and minds. You will have an all inclusive philosophy of life only which includes everybody which has a deep level connection with everything in this universe because it is an externalization of my own being. So, your intelligence will function at that level at the highest possible level. So, this simple yogic process was part and parcel of our educational system in the Vedic age, but we lost it in a way. Today it has to be put into a scientific paradigm and represented again, but the simple way to as I told you augment awareness is to change the yogi does it this way to lift your vital energies to the higher centers it will change the level of your awareness. You see the jnani type the thinker tries to do this by means of thought because his greatest reliance is on thought the bhakta tries to do it through the emotion, but the yogi tries to do it just by handling vital energy. So, this is a sambhavana, yek possibility hai humare life mein ki you can augment awareness and enhance your levels of awareness through all these processes. Then of course, the common thing which I I have told you earlier also, the third point about mind management is, you regulate life to a certain extent. It is not enough to just go after a high standard of life, the quality of your life matters most. And when I say regulating life, I mean bringing a certain amount of regulation in your life activities, your hours of eating, sleeping, working, a little regulation in that a very haphazard kind of life will result in a very erratic mind. You will see why this makes sense. You know in fact, this is how we practice in our monasteries also. If you in a fixed period every day if you practice meditation, whether you like it or not on every day your mind will want to go into meditation at that time. This is the nature of the mind. So, bringing a little routine into our life, you know what you are doing externally it may appear like a routine, internally more freedom has come into your life. So, you can see the life of very successful people who are successful in every sense not just in terms of IQ, such people have created this kind of a life, where they have developed consciously developed good habits, good habits is what was you know always talked about in our culture simple thinking. No, it is it is actually high thinking simple living, not simple thinking, high thinking, but simple living, keeping your mind at a certain level that is the most important thing. So, all these help in managing your mind, if you make all this a habit now, see you are very young, if you make these your habits now, this is your default state now, your life will follow. You will understand even when you are 40, 50, you will understand the value of this. But just now in what you do in youth, early youth especially, you know, it stays with you throughout your life, you build on that, you just ripen on these habits. So, make this all this very clear to your mind just now, this is a very important thing in my life. You must not take it as being a restriction of my freedom, you do not take it otherwise like this, this is an essential thing to know. Then we come to the laws of relationships which are very important for mind management. This is part of your curriculum because your your the relationships you make unless they are of a with a certain level of commitment, they will jeopardize your mind. What is basically a relationship? See please close this. Please understand this that relationships are based on certain basic values and it is a part of emotional intelligence. Today all over the world they are trying to study this in a very deep way. A relationship is basically about sharing what you have with another. It is about sharing. Now sharing means giving, isn't it? Giving freely of yourself, whatever you have to another. Now, if you are not capable of giving, which means you do not have something to give, will that relationship work? If you do not have anything substantial, something of value to give, a relationship will not work. If you are not in the position of a giver, the relationship will not work. This is a basic thing you should understand. Most people enter into relationships out of frustration because they are too stressed out they want some distraction in their life. So, go into a relationship that is no way to create a relationship there you will only try to extract some form of joy from the other person. So, it flops. First of all you should be a giver and how will you be a giver if you are not developed within yourself? That is why yoga in every way if your life is in your hands, you are overflowing by yourself with confidence, with bliss, with joy, then you can share it with another. So, a relationship, you can share it with another. This law was given by Buddha long long long back, 2500 years back. He gave this statement that if your purpose is only to extract joy from somebody, it will not work. If your purpose is to share your joys with others, you are so full, so overflowing from within that you would like to share it with somebody, then that person will also respond similarly. You see a beggar, a bankrupt person cannot give, is not it. So, first you should develop yourself, your thought, your emotion, your awareness should reach their peak. Then only a mature relationship is possible, otherwise it is just like a play, the other person is a play thing for you. So, nothing is going to work, you can be sure of that. So, please understand these are all things not to be played with. You must have the maturity to enter into a relationship only if you are overflowing with something which you would like to share not otherwise your thought, your emotion, your will, your love has reached a pitch where you are all satisfied by yourself but you would like to also share it with others. So then you learn the art of giving then it will work like magic you know a beggar cannot satisfy another beggar, a rich man can satisfy anybody so also first become rich in yourself first in your faculties God-given faculties through the processes of yoga you must become all sufficient yourself first and then any relationship will work for you. This is the basic thing you must understand about human relationships. They are not barter, it is not a business that is why relationship is based on commitment. It is something sacrosanct, it is absolute commitment and you cannot play with it. If you makes these things basic in your life, these principles absolute in your life, your life will be wonderful, it will just bloom like a flower. So, understand this this is the essential part of emotional intelligence. Such a relationship becomes devotional in nature. Out of that spirit of sharing, devotion is generated. It is not just any emotion and this devotion evolves you. Even in a human relationship, there can be a very deep degree of devotion, devotion only evolves you. So, it is a relationship the very purpose of it is to evolve the human being, is not it or is it to devolve you? It is to evolve you, the human being can become a like a god or he can become an animal based on his relationship. So, if you wanted to evolve you, you must handle it in a very mature way. Understanding these basic facts about relationships, you know in the Vedic age it was considered why I am giving you that paradigm is to a certain extent you will understand what they have to contribute in our today modern life. They used to say there are four Purusharthas, you might have heard of this in the Vedic times. What are they? Dharma, Artha, Kama, Moksha, four goals of life. Any human being you see, he will have some idea of this. Dharma, some idea of righteousness. Dharma is here not religion, it means righteous living. Then Artha you need wealth, kama satisfying legitimate desires and moksha some idea of liberation what should be the goal of life. So, this is natural to the human experience. Now, they always insisted that artha and kama should be based on dharma and they also insisted that if you play with dharma which means the principles of righteous living which are universal, then you will get nothing of these. Dharmo rakshati rakshitah dharmohantaram hanti. Dharma protects him who protects dharma and dharma destroys him who destroys dharma. If you play with these basic universal principles of good living, you will lose and if you bring them into your life culture then you will become a great human being, one who can really contribute to society and to the world at large. Hain na? Aap hi soch ke dekho, if you cannot handle your emotion immaturely, can you handle the other person's emotions? So, what will our relationship end in? Something very ugly, is not it? So, do not venture into all these experiments at this level were not allowed in our culture, because relationships should be committed, make all these things clear to your mind. Those of you who feel intensely about this you will see just following this little bit will develop your emotional intelligence enormously and success will be yours anywhere. All problems are coming because of this. In fact, most of you youngsters the intelligence is getting invested in solving problems created by wrong relationships, wrong emotions all this. So, do not waste your youth and energies unnecessarily like this. You must know some of these basic principles. You see how scientific the whole thing is. This is these are our normal cultural standards. This is why your cultural ideas are really ideas of very high emotional intelligence. India that way sociologically unique. You see the simple story of Ramayan. What levels of commitment are there, emotional commitment? Take that simple incident of Bharat coming and telling Shri Ram to please come back to the kingdom. Although Shri Ram is telling him again and again that you are my brother, I am giving you this, I am telling you, you go and rule the kingdom, I am giving the kingdom to you, still he says I will never do that because my elder brother alone can be king there, at the most I can be your representative but I cannot be in your place what level of the where the relationship has taken the person you see it has made him completely selfless like a sadhu so a relationship can ennoble your entire being, it can help you evolve very high, but if you play with it, it can destroy you. Hai na? Toh aap hi soch ke dekho, this is a essential part of mind management which nobody gives very sorry state of affairs, you must know essentially what is mattering in your life. Emotions play a crucial role in any man's life. If you have not learnt to make them sattvic, regulate them, control them and draw their energies for positive purposes you have failed in emotional intelligence. So, this is regarding the laws of relationships. Now we will go into how to handle negativity. When negativity comes into our life, how exactly will you handle it? So, let me show this to you in the form of slides. You see any problem, whether it is individual or collective, like you have a number of today individual, you can say youth problems which affect the individual like for example, attention deficit it is a major problem right attention deficit ADHD flitting of attention. So, all these problems what are the source factors we are not going to just give you symptomatic cures what are the source factors for these problems and even collective problems which we as a society face, what are the source factors and how do we tackle them. So, this I will show you in the form of a slide here, just ah pay attention to this you see the core causes for your suffering or grief. Take a take one problem here ADD, it is attention deficit disorder. This is a common problem all over the world, constant flitting of attention. Now you see the symptoms are distraction of attention, treatment is tranquilizers or sometimes even antidepressants are given, but the actual cause is uncontrolled exposure that is the actual cause. Before you can process a level of information, so much more data has been has entered your mind and your mind is basically very unstable you do not know how to process it. It results in attention deficit, the attention constantly keeps splitting from one thing to the other. And the solution can only be that is why not the tranquilizer, but the solution will be goal oriented focused life that is the solution can only be that is why not the tranquilizer, but the solution will be goal oriented focused life that is the solution for ADHD. Please make this clear to your mind, just popping in a pill so that I calm my nerves somehow that is just removing the symptoms very temporarily, but the actual cure lies in a goal oriented focused life committed to high values. Look at depression each problem just look at that depression the symptoms no sustained interest in anything and you are constantly in a negative mood. So, again the treatment consists of antidepressants, the actual cause is ego centeredness. Have you ever thought like this? Your cultural values will give you this. If you are only bound up in yourself and working only to exaggerate your ego all the time, it will lead to a certain level of depression, frustration, because you are not your ego essentially, you are the self, ego is a manufactured product of your mind. So, ego centeredness the solution will be service, yoga, creativity, learning something new, getting out of the clutches of your ego, ego bound sense life getting out of that. That is the solution actually for depression and not taking all sorts of medicines which will remove the symptoms temporarily. Then at a at the social level at the level of society you see corruption and all these problems which are today's our number one problems these are. What are they due to? The symptoms are exploitation at every level, the treatment is punishment and all sorts of laws are being formulated. The actual cause is selfishness and greed is not it? You see the it is in your mind the cause. So, the solution will be social responsibility. You make such people work for others, give them service outreach activities, they will overcome this tendency for corruption and exploitation. Crime, this is another devastating aspect of our society. You see the symptoms are deviancy in behavior at so many levels. Again the treatment is punishment or counselling usually both given in various ways and, but the actual cause is lust, anger and pride. This is what your culture always told you the talk the negative emotions arise from toxic thoughts like all these. So, the solution again should be service outreach activities, bringing good emotions into your mind service does that automatically, hm culturing the devotional aspect of your being consciously raising your mind that is the essential thing. That if if individually we become sensitive to all this collectively we can make a huge change please see this. Always change comes from the individual front is not it hm. So, at least you must understand all this in a very deep way. Then environmental degradation which is another major issue. So, here actually pollution is the cause for that and treatment again starts with awareness, but the actual causes again consumerism and greed. Our consumption patterns have become so enormous, desire is so absolute and sort of not at all under control that we have exploited all resources in whatever measure possible. Again the solution can be only service understanding yajna bhav which means the interconnectedness of life. So, respect for life all these are the actual solutions see in our heart of hearts we know this very well, but it is important to again and again run this through our head, so that it becomes a sanskar. Tomorrow, you will be the leaders of this society. If you are not sensitive to this, how will you make the changes required, tell me? Do not try to find silly cures, fixing this and trying to fix that. Go to the heart of the problem, everything will be revealed to you. Your intelligence should learn to function like this, then only changes are possible in our society. If you want to make the country great, it you must start from solutions like these and you must be paragons of that ideal, you must emanate that virtue, then only you will remain a leader, a real leader of the masses. Leadership is not about being a boss, leadership is about be having a mind which is all inclusive and so productive of good that your very presence generates that level of goodness in others. So, this kind of inspirational leadership will only come if you understand problems from within not just from without from the outside. Again this has to be closed door there is noise coming from there. Now you see one more slide which I want to show you on this is what are the obstacles to your happiness on the individual front, what is it that is causing this kind of a negative mood in your mind. So pay attention to this slide, you see the very first cause, the obstacle to your happiness is alienation of mind from its source, which means there is no idea about how I am functioning. Normally people do not have any idea of atman or self or anything like that, they just know something is happening in their mind. So, alienation of mind from the self is the preliminary the very first basic cause for all unhappiness. Second cause is all the emotional turmoil in your mind in the form of emotional insecurities right. The third cause is mind conditioned into negativity due to wrong habits. See like for example, there is something called perfectionism which means you are doing something wanting something to be done to perfection where it is not required. There are people of this type you know who will destroy themselves to perfect some silly thing which which was not required anyway. So, where are you giving your attention, your energies that becomes very important and then they will keep commenting on people who are not as perfectionist as they are to what outcome you never know hm. Try to see this in your own practical life how it works. Then there is what is called social comparisons which means jealousy, inferiority these are again causes for negativities in your mind. These are all obstacles to your happiness. Then materialism which means judging everything by the pleasure it gives you. Pleasure is not even happiness, but you are judging everything by that. So, this is another level which puts your mind into negative states and then maximizers that is want more even when satisfied, greedy people basically, unable to enjoy the present moment, they do not live in the present at all, anything you give them they will ask for what next. And then they are people who have no sense of gratitude also many times. See if this basic sense of gratitude is not there, I will come to that when I discuss happiness with you, is not there, you will never be satisfied. So, all these are the causes for the emotional insecurities, negativities in your mind. Small small causes they are, but they can create huge whirlpools in your mind. And please see this, a self-alienated mind will remain unhappy no matter how positive its content. This is the core cause for depression which means from within yourself you have no sense of yourself apart from your mental world your thoughts. You are never able to still the mind. See this is a huge quantum leap into your being, your ability to objectify thought. Once you get a hold over this through the practice of yoga, your mind will not suffer the self alienation. It is always stable and balanced. So, your thoughts have a very stable platform on which to perform. So, it it will not be unstable and unhappy the mind, this can only be generated by stilling the mind periodically that is why yoga, otherwise self alienated mind constantly. And remember a few more very practical things which I have put there, you do not have to be in the same room to catch someone's stress, is not this true? It is transmittable by email, text and social media, emotions are contagious online. Constantly you are exposing yourself to the media. Next class I will be telling you something about mirror neurons, a very important neurophysiological aspect of the brain. You actually mirror those emotions into yourself and experience them. So, your mind can suffer very unstable states that is why it is that is why control at every level is recommended. If you want to manage your mind well, you must keep it well, is not it? If I want to preserve something, do not I give care and attention to it? Now, you want to preserve your mind, should not you give care and attention to it? It is the most important thing, it can I told you become a gold mine or a waste paper basket or dustbin. What you want to make it, it will become that. Wo kalpa vriksha ka ek story hai na, you might have heard of it in our culture. There is a there is a very nice story. A man was walking in a forest and very tired and he suddenly came upon a tree and sat down in its shade. Now, he was so restless and tired, he thought, oh, if only I had a glass of water and suddenly a glass of water appeared there. Then he thought, oh, if only I had some food and food appeared there. He was under a Kalpavriksha, a wish fulfilling tree. So, whatever he wished, it was coming. So, he said, now if I had a bed to rest and a nice wonderful bed came there and he was resting and eating all this then suddenly he thought what if a tiger appeared here now when I'm living so beautifully and a tiger appeared and ate him up what they are trying to say is mind is like that Kalpavriksha, a well developed mind is actually a wish fulfilling tree, whatever you want it will produce, it will make it happen, because so, basically learn how to handle your mind, it is your Kalpavriksha or it is your garbage heap, anything you can make it. Now once we have seen this, these two slides, I would like to go into stress, stress management, it is part of your mind management thing. Now what is stress? All of us know it, so too much explanation is not required. Stress is a undercurrent of perpetual anxiety which has no explanation. It is constantly there with most minds and it is the greatest trigger of today's psychosomatic illnesses. Even 4 year old children have told me I am feeling stressed. They do not understand what it means but they are feeling some kind of a pressure on their mind. So, now what is the stress we will be studying in a bit of it and the solutions to this. Look at this stress is caused by what negative emotions complexes in the subconscious mind this is a primary cause for stress. Basically you are not able to manage your mind, it has become more negative than you know that causes stress, not the other person please know this. The other person is just a trigger, a stimulus, stress is happening in your system because you cannot handle your mind. It has become so negative, see that is a picture of your mind just some kind of a picture which is showing you your conscious mind and subconscious. Subconscious is a huge portion not that small bit, but here what you are generating in the conscious mind is going into your subconscious mind, this is what you must understand from that. So, if in my conscious mind there are negative emotions, then what will happen? Negative emotions like anger, hatred, jealousies all this is raging, it is going to go into my subconscious and become my sanskars. And to that if I add a defensive attitude which means what? The other person is responsible for my whatever stress not me I am very good, but the other person or so, fix the other person or fix my boss or fix my friend fix my peers. If this is the attitude you cannot get rid of your stress the other person may have triggered your problem, but the problem happened within you if I could manage myself I would not suffer stress even if the boss is like that or the other person is like that. So, this wrong value system comes from our defensive attitude, our justifying stress in terms of something external. So, this and along with all that stress causes conflicting thoughts in your mind creates complexes in your subconscious. This is the core fact. So, it has gone from your conscious plane, but in the subconscious it will keep blossoming again into the conscious plane. So, you are constantly in a state of stress even when that object is gone from you. You are back home from your job and the boss is no longer with you, but still the stress is going on, anxiety is going on, it builds up, it is cumulative in effect. So, constantly you are stressed out because of negative emotional activity in your mind. Like for example, you see there I have given when you are preparing for an exam, psychological stress factors may be laziness, procrastination, inattention, anger all bundled into a complex. You did all of this please see. Now it has become a complex and you are if you are dishonest in the exam that increases your stress. So, to a great extent your stress is mind manufactured. So, then how will you get rid of it? great extent your stress is mind manufactured. So then how will you get rid of it? You must tell me the solution. If you have understood this diagram, you know your mind has manufactured your stress. How will you get rid of it? Bringing basic stability to the mind, so that these complexes do not form at all my mind is so stable the thoughts are so objective to my experience I am able to handle them they are not etching my mind surface and creating these complexes at all when somebody irritates me I take it for what it is, I do not add anything to it. I maintain my calmness of mind no matter what happens on the outside. This much maturity is expected especially tomorrow in your workplace, this will be very much required and be absolutely honest. If you are dishonest, it will increase your stress which means you try to take revenge on the other person or invent tales about that other person just because of your stress or your jealousy all this will never work . So, understand your mind should be tranquil no matter what is on the external front, then only you there will be no stress. So, basically it is the heart of mind management, understanding my mind has to be stable hm for that meditation is the direct means to overcome stress. Every day I calm my mind, I try to produce very stable states of mind, I calm my mind, I bring tranquility into my entire personality, not always in that restless excitability mode. So, all these small small things if you practice you can handle these states of mind. And if there are strong negative complexes already in the mind, I resolve them through the right attitude. I understand that that has happened due to a particular reason. So, I allow that that reason to remain there, I do not add something to that reason. The boss got angry for a particular reason, it was an outflow of his bad mood, why should it ruin my life. So, this basic stability only if you train your mind it will come into you into your system and not otherwise, otherwise in some level of stress everybody is going through. So, practice a little meditation bringing stability to your mind and you can handle negative complexes. They will not form first of all if they form also you will know how to handle them very strong anger, hatred all this can cause a terrible states of mind and your work that is why they say stress is work related because all these emotions have come to play in the work workplace. So, basically my mind bereft of everything it is very stable. So, when anything comes in also it remains manageably stable, then I can handle stress right. You understood the thing many people will give you many ideas on stress management, but the basic thing is this I have full control over my response reaction mechanism. So, I do not suffer stress. Every day I practice meditation, I experience deep calmness of mind. So, I do not suffer stress. This is the basic fundamental thing you should know about stress. Then one more thing which you should know in mind management is what is called decision making. I will just point out to a few things and you will know what it is. See when you are out to a few things and you will know what it is. See, when you are trying to take look at that little boy in the slide, if you place these two things before the little boy, within a few seconds he will decide he wants the cake not the apple. Now he has a choice, what makes him decide the cake? Tell me. Taste. Taste. So, it is an object of pleasure for the young boy. If the cake is an object of pleasure, he is choosing it. When you grow up, this you are doing as young boys, when you grow up and you are say 25, what will you choose between the two for breakfast still the cake, you will choose an apple. As you grow older you will prefer only the apple. Now, what we are trying to tell you here is decision making entirely rests on a kind of basic inner discrimination which means discretion between what is merely pleasant and what is really good. In any decision that you take this point will come up. Yours is a great culture which told you these two are different things. What is merely pleasurable is not always what is good for you. Pleasure is some short term satisfaction, good is long term fulfillment, the two are different. So, whenever there is a choice in front of you always think the long term fulfilling choice is what is called Shreyas, what is preferable, what is good for you in the long run and what the short term attraction is what is pleasurable, it is called Prayas. It will ensnare your senses, but it will not give you any level of fulfillment, it is very temporary and that these two are different basically you must be able to make this difference in your life before you make a decision. Understand that these two are coming before me in this form, this particular form. Here I have given a very simple form in very big decisions you will have to take in life. So, see if it is Shreyaskar or Prayaskar first thing survey all the options see which is Shreyaskar choose that which brings Shreyas which brings long term satisfaction and fulfillment and then you must cut out the other options you must remove the cake from the table, otherwise your mind will swing back. This is the nature of the mind. So, for a decision to work, now you have only one choice, which you have made based on very solid grounds. Then that choice will dominate your life and your decision is complete. See simple points these are, but they make a huge difference to you. We had a whole session of this sometime back here only in the seminar hall in IIT and this everyone asks for for the simple fact that we at the point when so many options are available I do not know what decision to make, but this deep inner see yoga again gives you the capacity to do this because mind is stable I have very sharp discrimination. I can find out what is the right thing to do and what is merely pleasurable to do quickly if the mind is very stable then I will make the right choices. Whether you choose what career options you are going to choose tomorrow, which company you are going to choose, how you are going to build your life in that particular company, even your family whatever you get into decision making is vital to your happiness in life is not it. You will have to make very big decisions on the individual front and collectively for your society, for your nation, maybe you will be working in Google tomorrow, you will have to make major decisions there. Unless you have this strong sense, will this bring good to a whole lot of people or is it just merely something pleasurable. So, this distinction must come strongly into you, any decision will work due to this, you make the right decisions. Otherwise, you know what you will fall in for popular opinion, majority opinion, peer pressure. If you do not have this sense you will fall for all that. So, again this depends on how you have trained your mind. Hain na, are you seeing the truth of all this? Just now you can see it. So, at least ingest some of these ideas for now. Now let me go to 5 practical tips to mind management. See, these are the practical things you can do every day. First is you think positive, second is you are sociable, which means what not that you go out and mix with everybody, it means what you are a friend to everybody. You do not consciously make enemies, you do not consciously go out and criticize and sort of you know there are certain minds which have this tendency to at once take the negativities of others, a very critical outlook. So, you do not have such you are naturally sociable, you are naturally able to accept others this is the meaning. Third is you eat healthy, do not get used to eating only fast food at this age, it has its effect on your mind. You see it is a small point, but it is important very important. Then keep your mind active and learn new things, if you get into sluggish, thomasic states, it will affect your mind, the performance of your mind. So, remain active and learn new things. You are creating new neural pathways, the learning process is like that. And exercise, I hope you all are exercising with your very heavy study routine, exercise should be part of your life. So, these are the simple tips for mind management. Always remember this bottom line, you rewire your brain through your mind, through your thoughts. So, keep an attention on your thoughts. Habitually, how am I thinking? What are the thoughts that cross my mind? That is the way to mind management. Now, I will just give you some, we have another 5 minutes, I will give you basic points on mind, that is the way to mind management. Now I will just give you some, we have another 5 minutes, I will give you basic points on happiness, because study of happiness is essential part of what we are calling mind management. So once you have this understanding of happiness, you have, I would say a very good understanding of how to keep the mind positive. There is a there was a whole course called study of happiness, science of happiness about a year back which took place right here and a huge number of students attended that course because they want to know fundamentally what is it that keeps my mind happy, how do I manufacture it by myself. So, let me just give you a summary of it, some of the essential points. First of all, do you understand happiness is a state of your mind? So, mind is essential, very important, positive state of mind is essential to your happiness. On an everyday basis, what can you do to make the mind positive, keep the mind positive? First is learn to appreciate the good in your life. First thing, there is so much goodness in your life. Today you are in a position very few can be in this position. You are studying at one of the premier educational institutions in this country and which is looked up to even in foreign countries. You God has endowed you with the very best of brains, you have come from such good families, you have everything that life has to offer. Are you appreciative, do you understand this? And habitually do you appreciate the goodness in others? Do you talk about it? Ya sirf isne ye nahi kiya, isne aisa kiya, isne waisa kiya. This should not be your default dialogue even in your mind. Make the mind positive through sentiments of appreciation. Appreciate the good in others anything of value you see you should say ah this is beautiful. If this sentiment does not arise in your mind if you have a tendency to put down everything you will be in perpetual depression. Your mind will give the immediate effect. First point, second point is gratitude. Be grateful for the blessings of your life. Please see this even for a simple plate of food to come in front of you, do you know how many people have worked? See at least 15 people have worked. Today you had lunch and came here, 15 people have worked for that single plate of food to come in front of you starting from that farmer who sowed the seeds. And you just when you are not gratitude for you do not have gratitude for what you have you insert the work and the energy of all these 15 people that has an effect on your mind. So, be grateful for every single thing that has come into your life be grateful for it. So, be humble be thankful on everyday basis. So, be respectful to the people around you at least to whom ever you encounter you know namaste in our culture what it means I bow down to the God in you that is why we join our palms this should be our attitude to anybody coming in front of us then positivity will reign in your mind because this is the way of life, this is not some theory, you have to be grateful because you are taking from life, at least acknowledge it and be grateful. Tomorrow you will have to give back. So, gratefulness should be an undercurrent in your mind constantly, respectfulness and gratefulness. Then the logic of basic sentiments and emotions let me tell you, see your normal logic 2 plus 2 is equal to 4, 2 minus 2 is equal to 0, this applies only to mathematics, it does not apply at the level of emotion or awareness. What do I mean by this? If you share love, if you give love, if you give service, if you give care, empathy, it only grows. Usually people do not want to give because they feel somewhere they will lose, it will deplete something in them the logic of emotion is as you give it grows please see this suppose there is a mother at home now you are the son when you go home she gives 100% of her love to you she is so happy that you have come she does so many things for you a mother's nature is like that. Now after a few days your sister also comes. She is able to give 100% of her love to that sister also. Now if she gave 100% love to you, she must be at 0 level now when your sister comes according to your mathematics. But this maths does not work like this. She is able to give 100% love to your sister also. When somebody else comes, a guest comes, she is able to give love to that guest also. She is able to serve everybody. Why? She is basically of a loving disposition. She is a person with love. This is the nature of love. The more you give give the more it grows 2-2 is equal to 4 not 0 which means what if you give your love to somebody you feel it is 2-2 you do not become 0 it adds to you become four you have developed the loving disposition and you can give out more and more when does it deplete within you if you don't give it if you don't give your love it will become zero if you don't give care if you don't give attention to others if you don't include others in your life you will become a zero the more you give the more it grows you know you have heard of Purnamadam Purnamidam Purnat Purnamudachyate Purnasya Purnamadaya Purnamevavashyasyate this is an important mantra in Vedas they are telling you that is Purnam, Brahman is Purnam, this world which is its manifestation also is Purnam and that Purnam creates this Purnam and if you remove Purnam from Purnam, Purnam remains over. Purnamadaya Purnameva Varshishyatev, it means this, if you give wholly of something still it remains over as whole, if you cannot give you will get depleted of it. So this is the logic of love, if you want to be happy you must have a loving disposition one of giving, you are the giver anywhere, you and you cannot give monetarily but how can you give you see to your family how can you give you can give in terms of love and care and attention feeling isn't it in so many ways you can show your love but if you are if you want to remain totally away or you don't even acknowledge what they have done for you, what your society has done for you, how much you have taken from society, then you will become loveless, unhappy. So, understand this, a loving disposition naturally brings great happiness into your life. Now, let me focus on one more thing engagement produces happiness high-level engagement of the mind have you seen this if you are absorbed in some mathematical problem in something which is deeply engaging to your mind it will produce a vast amount of happiness in your system it is a higher level of happiness. Please remember this basically there are different levels of happiness available to you. You can watch that video ladder of happiness it is there in NRCV videos. The ladder of happiness human personality means you are given this ladder of happiness. At the base of the ladder, the very first rung of the ladder is sensory level happiness, what you get from sensual objects, that is not the only level, that is only the first rung. After that you have happiness born of thought, after that you have happiness born of your intelligence, intellect. You see a high level mathematical problem even a game of chess it simply engages you, flow is generated. So, you have a lot of happiness out of that, then you have the happiness of service that is the next rung of the ladder, you just give something to a person in need and the satisfaction that will spread across his or her face will produce enormous satisfaction in you. Gandhiji says this in his autobiography you know he says once he gave something to a poor child and the happiness that in degrees spread across that face it completely satisfied him for the first time he understood joy comes when joy is given to another this is the strange thing about happiness you make somebody happy your heart will be full of happiness so understand that the joy of service is very high beyond that is the happiness born of meditation the stopping thought or bringing very sattvic thought into your mind, it just your mind explodes with bliss, very high level happiness. So, these are all the rungs of happiness, the ladder of happiness is available to you. You know when you become unhappy, when you restrict your happiness only to the first level of the ladder, the first rung, you are trying to maximize objects there, collecting more and more objects, that is not the way to increase your happiness. You must climb the ladder, go to the next level, go to the thought level, the intellectual level, the service level, the meditation level, that is the way to maximize happiness in your life. If you try to maximize happiness only by remaining at one rung, it cannot be done that way, you must climb the ladder. So this is basically what you should know about happiness. Finally I will give you one equation for happiness and finish today's class. You see initially you think the external object is responsible for your happiness. Gradually, as you mature in life, you will understand your mind went into a particular state. So, happiness was generated, may be stimulated by the object, but happiness is a state of mind. Finally, you understand happiness was nothing, but a property of yourself, your own being reflected by the mind and superimposed on that object, attributed to that object, but essentially it is my own being, not that it is happy, it is happiness itself, it is all bliss. When its reflection falls on your mind, the mind mind becomes happy if it is not very cluttered and that happiness level you superimpose on objects and you give credit to the object so this entire thing it is to be known by oneself in the state of yoga if you enter the state of meditation you will know this by yourself. This is how we learn, we wake discrimination because it is an experience with you. So, this is what you must essentially know about mind management. We have covered a lot of essential points today. Go over this again and again. Through your, with the help of your meditation, this should become part and parcel of your thinking, not like one course class, not like that, part and parcel of my thought process and a lot of fulfillment will come into your life. So, we will end today's class here.
 Om Asato Ma Satgamaya Tamaso Ma Jyotirgamaya O nti nti nti O, lead us from the unreal to the real, lead us from darkness unto light, lead us from death to immortality. Om, peace, peace, peace. Om Namah Shriyati Rajaya, Vivekananda Suray, Sajjit Sukha Swaroopaya, Swami Nithyabharane. Salutations to Swami Vivekananda. Today, welcome to this very auspicious day. We are celebrating the 158th birth anniversary of Swami Vivekananda. Specially here, it is being celebrated around the world, but here especially. This center, we have the proud heritage of having been founded by Swami Vivekananda himself. This was the first Vedanta society. After he came to the West in 1893, the World Parliament of Religions and then New Yorkers always enterprising, they grabbed him first and said you come to our city and start something. So that was the first Vedanta Society 1894. If you look outside it says Vedanta Society of New York founded in 1894. I often see people walking past looking at it casually then stopping and look coming back and taking a look again. 1894 so many years ago. In this talk what I shall do is Swami Vivekananda gave a talk, the real and the apparent man. And he gave this talk in New York in the Vedanta Society, not in this building because this building we got a hundred years ago in 1920. But before that it was in different rented locations. So it was a talk given in New York and we shall reflect upon what he said in this talk. This talk is included in Swami Vivekananda's Jnana Yoga. Swami Vivekananda said later on that he always intended to write a book on Advaita Vedanta. He never did it. He never had the time to do it. But the closest we have are these collection of talks, lectures on Jnana Yoga, the way of knowledge. They are collected in one book. So the real and the apparent man, a very powerful talk he gave here. In this talk Swami Vivekananda answers the greatest of all questions. Who are we and what is our destiny? What is human destiny? What's going to become of us? What are we? What's our nature? And he brings together, he says I shall attempt to present here the thought of ancient India. Basically three streams of thought, three very broad philosophical, I won't say three philosophies because there are more than one philosophy in each one of these streams of thought. So three broad philosophical currents he presents. Remarkable performance in one talk, the entirety of dualism, dvaita, various kinds of dualistic philosophies and we will see very soon what it means, what does dualism mean actually. And then the opposing current in the form of, opposing to dualism, in the form of Buddhism, he presents that too. And finally works out a harmony in non-dualism in Advaita. So dualistic philosophy, Dvaita and Buddhistic philosophy, each of these, you can say there are a bunch of schools of philosophies actually. And then finally non-dualism. So he starts off, actually he starts off by a quick survey on an ancient Indian cosmology. What is this physical universe? And I will not go into it, just very briefly. He says that the idea was all of this material, the material universe has come from one primordial material called Akasha, literally translates into space. And all forces are resolved back into one primordial force called prana. So all force energy in this universe is a product of that prana and all the matter that we see in this universe is a product of that primordial akasha. Prana works on akasha, produces this entire universe. Now it's not as primitive as it might sound because if you look at the most modern theories of cosmology, I will not enter into that, we are just touching upon it. I was just reading that the latest ideas of the origin of the universe, they are talking about something called a quantum flux where there is an emptiness, a nothingness, a void but a mass of potential particles are there which pop into existence and disappear immediately in tiny fractions of a second. From unmanifest state into a manifestation and back again into an unmanifest state until the big bang comes and this physical universe is produced. I think that if you got one of these ancient philosophers like Kapila for example, who is at the source of the ancient Sankhya philosophy. Swami Vivekananda calls him the first philosopher of humanity more than 5000 years ago. And if you were to educate him in quantum mechanics and tell him about the quantum flux, he would be quite happy, he would be pleased with it. I mean in principle it's not different. I am not at all claiming, not making exaggerated claims about the ancients knew about quantum mechanics and not at all, that's silly. They didn't have the benefit of our modern physics or mathematics but in principle you see that there was a primordial material from which evolves everything else. And Swami Vivekananda says beyond both Akash and Prana he goes to Sankhya philosophy and says there is this cosmic mind Mahat, from them all this has emerged. But back to ourselves, what are we? And Swami Vivekananda starts his talk with an epistemological investigation. How do we see anything? How do we experience anything? So light comes from outside and then it enters into our eyes, into our optic nerves. There are objects outside here, so many things. But when it comes to our eyes, it's no longer objects. The paper or the clock or the person does not enter into my eye, that would be terrible. It's just reflected light which comes. From all objects, just light comes to the eyes. The eyes gather in light. And from there, it doesn't remain light. Very soon it becomes an image in the lens of the eye and immediately after that it becomes a burst, a tiny tiny burst of electricity in our optic nerves. And that impulse is transmitted down to the brain and in the brain center somehow. Even here with all our latest science, it ends there. What is happening in the brain center, that's the last thing that we can see in science, nothing more, that's it. But our experience does not end there. We experience everything in the mind, it becomes a thought in the mind, a perception in the mind. And from the mind, Swami Vivekananda uses manas, manas which collates all information. Manas is the Sanskrit term for mind. It collects information not only from the eyes but also the ears and the sense of touch and smell and taste. And then it presents it to the buddhi, the intellect. So these are fine divisions of the mind. The intellect now matches it with past experience which is collected in the form of the hard drive, the chitta, the storehouse of past impressions. So memory comes up and it's matched with that. And then Vivekananda says, these ancient philosophers they said something more is necessary. The world is a mass of change, Body is continuously changing. The sense organs are dynamic and functioning and the mind is also continuously changing, so is the buddhi. But ultimately on the background there must be an unchanging unity of perception. It's almost the language of Kant, Immanuel Kant. An unchanging unity of a perception must be there on which all of this is thrown and from which a reaction comes and that is knowledge. All of this it takes so much time to say. All we see is I see you. That's it. So a knowledge comes, flash of knowledge comes. There is this background, an unchanging background and Swami Vivekananda, he uses an example. His talk is full of metaphors and similes, very rich in examples, in metaphors, similes. In fact at one point I started counting and I counted 16 different types of examples which he has used. One of them he uses at this point, the camera, that was high tech at that time. You had to go to a studio and a camera, it was a big deal, not a selfie, not like today. You have to stand in front of a background and the camera is there, which is a big, looks like a modern science fiction ray gun or something like that. And the man will come, he will throw a black coat over himself and so on. He says look at the camera, there is the light and the lens and so many things but ultimately there is an unchanging background on which everything is thrown, the light is thrown, the image is thrown and it is captured there. So that unchanging background is necessary to give unity to our perception that I see, I am one being who sees and hears and smells and tastes and touches and remembers and understands and thinks and feels and desires and hates. All of this united in one background which we call the self. Clearly, this is an unchanging background, otherwise, to make sense of all the changes, there must be something which is unchanging with respect to the changing body and mind. So the self cannot be the body, the self cannot be the changing mind, the self must be this unchanging background which the ancients called Atman, the self. So this Atman theory, I will not say theory, I will say theories. There are multiple theories which emerged. But the basic model was this. There is of course the world but here is the body, the living body and beyond, subtler than the body, inner to the body is what is called the subtle body. Sukshma Shariva, subtle body. Nothing peculiar in this. The subtle body we experience also. Right now, when you feel emotions, when we experience things, when we think and remember, all of this is the subtle body. You say, why isn't it the physical body? Where does the physical body end? Even the most sophisticated instruments at our disposal will end with the functioning of the brain and the nervous system. None of them will reveal to you love or hate or understanding or memory or forgetfulness. Yes, they will reveal what are called the neural correlates of these things. The activities in the brain, but it's not exactly the same thing. When you taste a cup of tea or coffee, the warmth and the texture and the fragrance and the taste that you feel, you feel that, you don't feel a burst of electricity. Nobody does that. When you see, you see colour, you see red, you don't see a burst of electricity. Nobody does that. When you see, you see color, you see red, you don't see a burst of electricity. The scientist is seeing the burst of electricity and you are experiencing the first-person experience which are called qualia. What is the connection between these? That is the cutting edge of thought in modern consciousness studies. That's called the hard problem of consciousness and I can see people rolling their eyes. I'm not going to go into that, one of my favorite subjects but I'm not going to go into that. So ultimately there must be something beyond the physical body and that the ancients called the subtle body which we all experience all the time. But something beyond the changing subtle body also which these dualistic schools called the self, the Atman. So self is our real nature. We are actually not this physical body because the self existed before we had a physical body and the self exists, the Atman exists now that we have a physical body. But one day the physical body will die and the self continues to exist. I will not go into the arguments but it is not very difficult to see why they would have thought that because when death comes, what is the empirical evidence? Empirical evidence is here was a living body, now it is a dead body. Nobody has the evidence that the self, the Atman is dead. How do you know? It's only the person who is getting the first person experience within that person is qualified to say yes or no. But if the person says yes I am dead, that means he is not dead. We cannot contact that person because the means of contact are dead now, because the body is dead. So the ancients evolved this idea if the self cannot die, the subtle body also does not die. The sukshma sharira, thoughts, feelings, emotions, our past experiences, samskaras they are called. And these ones, the Atman gathers to itself the subtle body, physical body is dead, Atman gathers to itself the subtle body and leaves the inhabitable dead body. The body cannot be used anymore, it goes. Why does it go? Where does it go? Why does it have these experiences? So the great theory of karma. So why should I believe in karma? Karma is nothing but cause and effect and everybody believes in cause and effect. Entirety of science is cause and effect. What we call common sense is causality. There are causes and there are consequences. Actions and consequences, causes and effects. Everybody knows this and even a child, even the more intelligent of the animals, they have a sense of causality. If I do this this that will happen. So causality that applied to our personal life is the law of karma. So this is something that the ancient Indians believed in irrespective of schools. All the dualistic schools believed in it, all the Buddhist schools believed in it, all the Jain schools believed in it. So and the non-dualists also in their own special way. Karma is upon the departed soul. Now look at the words, they make sense. Departed soul. What has departed? Not the physical body that's gone, dead, buried, burnt, whatever. The departed soul is the Atman plus the subtle body. It's the subtle body which departs from the physical body. And in the dualistic schools, the Atman also departs. Atman is something that comes and goes in the old schools. Where does it go? Depends on karma. Each individual has his or her own karma and depending on that karma, that person has other experiences. What are the other experiences? So these dualistic schools spoke about three possibilities. So Swami Vivekananda is here just sort of summarizing the thought of these ancients. Three possibilities after death. One is that those who were very spiritual, very devout. Devout in what sense? There was also the idea of God. What is God? Among all these selves, the Atma, there are many Atmans. Among all these Atmans, there is one special Atman. We are all Atmans, soul, separate self. But one special Atman, not only is it immortal like each of us but it's also all-powerful it is the creator of the universe it's basically the self or the soul of this physical universe and they called it God. You see it's a belief yes it's a belief they believed that there is just like there is a soul in each body there's a soul to this entire universe and they called it God. It was another kind of Atman, a special Atman, very powerful, unlike us. All-knowing, all-powerful and the creator of this universe, benevolent and so on. So if the person is very devout to this God and has lived a very moral and ethical life, has enormous amounts of good karma. There's enormous amounts of good karma. Then this person goes to what you might call the highest heaven. They had a name for it, Brahma Loka. That's the place where you feel where God dwells. This God of the universe, they call it Ishwara or Bhagawan that dwells in heaven and they give different names to it. The Vedic name is Brahma Loka but later on in the Puranic age this became Kailasha, Vaikuntha, Devi Loka and so on. So you go there and you dwell in the presence of God. If that soul is very pure, has no further desires, then when this universe will come to an end, that soul gets moksha, liberation. And it does not have to come back to the cycle of births and deaths. If there is any desire left, that person will again have to come back again to this human form and work out karma. That's the first one. It's a very glorious destiny. So it's only reserved for very good, very spiritual people. Then the next level is those who are devout and good but they have not reached that acme of spiritual perfection. So after death they go to what is called Pitriloka, the world of the forefathers, the world of the ancestors. So there is a whole range of heavens. Take your pick. Actually you can't take your pick, it depends on your karma, on your moral credit. So you are placed in what we deserve. You go there and these are very pleasant places to spend thousands of years until our good karma is worked out and our bad karma is upon us again and we tumble back into this world and we are reborn as a baby somewhere. Usually once you get a human birth, so all kinds of births are possible. Physical bodies of all sorts, animals, birds, bees, human beings, everything. But once you get a human birth you progress further and further. You generally do not. The third option is for the wicked. So if a person is particularly naughty, then you don't get to go to the highest heaven, of course not. Not even to the world of the forefathers. One is born as animals and birds, plants and work out the evil karma. Or even there are lower worlds. You are born as devils and demons and you work out the lower karma, bad karma through suffering and you are back again into the human world. So this was their cosmology. Whose cosmology? The dualistic schools in ancient India. Among whom you can count the Naiyayikas, the Vaisheshikas, the Sankhyans, the Yoga school. Swami Vivekananda said that note the glory of human destiny, the glory of human birth in this whole scheme. Believe in it or not, notice that it says only in the human birth you can generate good karma. So you are all, he says this human world was called karma bhoomi, the world of karma. So here you come back and work out your salvation. What would salvation be like? One gets freedom from the cycle of birth and death. You, the ever perfect self, the Atman, you are limited, constricted as it were, put in a straitjacket as it were. What is the straitjacket? There are two of them. One is the subtle body and one is the physical body and shuttle from one lunatic asylum to the other. So this is what's happening to us and freedom from this cycle of birth and death is the goal of life. So that you remain as the self unrestricted. In fact, the Kashmiri Shaivas, they talk about physical bodies as Kanchukas, like shirts which are tight. The Holy Mother says once in her meditation, she felt entirely free of the physical body and she soared into her real self. And then she said, when I felt a tug back into the body and I did not want to come back to this dirty cage of flesh and bone. So it's like that and freedom from it is remaining in your real self. What is the nature of this Atman, this self? We know what is the nature of the body here. We know what is the nature of the subtle body. We know thoughts, feelings, emotions like that. What's the nature of the Atman? Different theories. The Nyaya Vaisheshika school said it was like a substance, a dravya, not conscious in itself but when it comes into contact with the mind you experience awareness and thoughts, feelings, emotions. The Sankhya school said no, no, no, the self is conscious, it is consciousness itself, its very nature is consciousness, awareness. Only when you come into contact with the mind, this consciousness is reflected in the thoughts and feelings and you experience that awareness. It's like if light is there, but there is no object to reflect light, you would not be aware of light. Like deep space, looks black and dark. But if a comet passes through it, you see a dazzling display of the tail of the comet. Is the comet carrying its own light? No. It is the sunlight which is streaming through the darkness of space and when the comet passes through that sunlight, it shines. That means the light was there all along. Similarly the Sankhyens say you are of the nature of pure consciousness and when you come into contact with the mind then it lights up like the tail of the comet and you experience awareness. Anyway, these were different ideas but the basic idea of the self was we are an immortal being, not that nice saying, we think we are human beings in search of spiritual experience, but the truth is we are spiritual beings having a human experience. The dualistic schools would entirely agree. That's what they wanted to say. We are spiritual beings, this Atman, in plural, each of us is a separate Atman. So far so good, very nice cosmology and you know this is basically the idea behind most religions. In Hinduism, the Vaishnava, Shakta, Shaiva idea, we are all Jiva, separate beings and there is a God, you can call it Shiva or Shakti or whatever you want to call it, Vishnu, whatever you want to call it. Same idea. And we go through heavens and hells and earths and finally get liberation and remain in heaven in the presence, highest heaven, Brahma Loka, in the presence of God. Same idea in Islam and Christianity and Judaism, everywhere. This is the dualistic idea. So far so good. But now comes the Buddhist, who is very skeptical about this whole picture. The Buddhist asks, where is this precious Atman of yours? Where is this great God of yours? We experience a changing body. Here's the body changing. Nobody doubts that. We experience the world and the body which is a massive change. We even experience the mind which is a massive change. Thoughts, feelings, emotions coming rushing on and off, flickering in and out. But beyond this why talk about an Atman? What are the arguments? Where is the proof of such a thing? That there is a body and a mind and an Atman, a third entity. Where is the proof of such a thing? There must be a unity, changelessness behind all the change. Otherwise how would you have? They attacked, the Buddhists attacked this. Why does it have to be a changeless entity? A relatively changeless entity can serve as much, you know, like the mind is changing very fast and related to that there is another part of the mind which does not change so much. And that one can cognize this one. So there are a lot of arguments started, tremendous philosophers came up and they had this idea of not-self. Self theory versus not-self theory, Atma theory versus Anatma theory. Nagarjuna, Vasubandhu, Dignaga, Dharmakirti, Chandrakirti, Ratnakirti, one who wrote the Bodhicharyavatara, Shantideva. Incredible, a great flowering of philosophy took place when the Buddhist philosophers attacked the dualistic Hindu schools, challenging them to prove the existence of this Atman because without Atman and without God, God and self, without soul and without God the whole dualistic religion collapses. What's it for? What does it talk about? So this tremendous attack started and the dualistic schools also produced great philosophers who fought back and this fighting was of course highly intellectual. They developed metaphysical theories, developed, became more sophisticated, logic developed, the art of debate developed, linguistic theories developed and so Indian philosophy saw a thousand year of blooming. So many texts, so many schools, so many theories and very sophisticated stuff, which is only now beginning to be reflected in modern thought. I spent the last six months at Harvard studying these Buddhist schools. And the professor would point out once in a while, look, this is what this Buddhist philosopher Chandrakirti is saying. Now look at what Wittgenstein said in Cambridge in the middle of the 20th century. What Russell says, what Wittgenstein says, what Sellars says, what Quine says in America, separated by a thousand years, 1200 years, almost exactly the English translation of what they were saying in Sanskrit 1200 years ago. It's stunning to see. He says that there's very little that's truly new in philosophy. So they're just styles which come into style, fashion and which go out of fashion. And you see the same ideas being reflected again. Swami Vivekananda in his talk, he said this. He says a lot of what the Buddhists said is now sort of being recycled back as modern thought in the West. He said there is very little that is new here actually. Even this whole debate between idealists and realists, idealism and realism. This was an ancient debate between the Vijnanavadi Buddhists, Yogachara Vijnanavadi school of Buddhism versus the Nyaya realists and worked out in much more subtle, very carefully, intricately worked out details than even what modern philosophers are trying to understand. So this was the Buddhist, the great Buddhist attack. They demonstrated that even without accepting an unchanging separate Atman, just if you take the mass of change as this body and mind, you can still explain memory, you can still explain perception, you can still even explain karma. Buddhists accepted it, that you go through births and rebirths. If you ask who goes, if you don't exist, then who is going through? They'll say a stream is going through this. When a wave travels in the ocean, it's not that the same wave is coming here, at the same, at each place the water rises and falls. If you shake a rope which is tied from this end to that end, you will see a wave will travel across the rope. It's not that one entity is travelling from here to there unchangingly. It's just the wave is a movement of the rope at each place. Similarly, there is a transmission, not that there is an entity called Atma travelling from life to life. There is a transmission of forces. So at each moment it is different. You thought that you came to the Vedanta society and then you waited for the talk and you are listening to the talk. Not at all. The Buddhist will say the one who came to the Vedanta society is history, gone, finished. The one who sat down is gone, finished. And you who are listening, you are also going away, getting finished very soon. And each moment to moment a new entity is arising and disappearing. I don't know which one is more difficult to swallow, an eternal, permanent self or moment to moment arising and disappearing me. Let me give a little example of how they worked it out. It's good to listen to these ancient philosophers. Vivekananda did not quote this, but I'm just introducing this. Chandrakirti, who lived around 600 CE, 680, 1400 years ago, he says he wants to prove that there is no self, no Atman. How does he do it? He says he uses his famous example of the chariot. Today he would have used an SUV or something, but anyway, chariot will do. So the example, if you Google, it is a famous thing, Chandrakirti's chariot, if you Google. So he has introduced what is called a seven-fold reasoning. What is the example? First we must understand. Chandrakirti says quite stunningly, there is no such thing as a chariot. What do you mean? There it is. You came on a chariot yourself. What is this then? He said, no, let us examine. Where is this chariot? And I will show that there is no such thing as a self, Atma. Alright, how? Sevenfold reasoning. Very quickly I'll run through it, not very difficult. First, the chariot is not the same as its parts. The wheels and the axle and the nave of the chariot and the platform, that's not the chariot. If you take the parts separately, is it the chariot? No. The parts themselves are not the chariot. If you take the parts separately, is it the chariot? No. The parts themselves are not the chariot. The wheel is a wheel, it's not a chariot. Similarly, the body-mind is not the self. And here Vedanta agrees. All the arguments that I have often shared with you to show why the body-mind is not the Self. Same things Chandrakirti says, 300 years before Shankaracharya. Why is the body-mind not the Self? Because it is an object and you are the experiencer of that object. Because it is changing and you admit yourself that I the Self am unchanging. I was the same self, the same I was in the baby body, in the child's body, in the teenager's body, in the middle-aged person's body. Body is changing so much. Then how can I be the body? If I am unchanging and the body is changing, I cannot be changing. Unchanging cannot be the same thing. The body and mind are made of a composite, are made of so many parts. Organs, tissues and cells and so much of stuff is there. And thoughts, feelings, emotions, ideas. Which one of those parts am I? None. They are complex. I always think of myself as a unit. I don't think of myself as a committee. So I am unit, identity, one and the body is many. So these arguments Chandrakirti gives to show that what you consider to be the self, the Atman, it can't be the body, which is an object, which is changing, which is composite because you admit yourself the self is not changing, the self is the subject, the self is one. So the self cannot be the body, just as the chariot is not the parts. One. Two. The chariot is nothing apart from the parts. Is there a chariot apart from the parts? If you say there is no space for all the parts here, just keep the parts aside but you can park your chariot in front of the... That can't be done. There is no chariot apart from the parts. The parts are not the chariot and yet there is no chariot apart from the parts. Similarly, is there a self apart from the body and mind? That's what you are claiming. This is the crucial claim of the dualistic schools. Where? Prove it. Every argument that the dualistic schools give to show a separate self is necessary. The Buddhists counter by giving arguments to show that whatever reason you are giving, memory, going from birth to life, karma, the unity of perception, all of these can be explained without a separate self. They can be explained with the use of the mind itself, body-mind itself. Second, the chariot is not apart from the parts and the self is not apart from body and mind. There is no self, you can't demonstrate. Third, is the chariot the possessor of the parts? You might say, look, you are just playing with words. I am not saying that I am the hand or the belly. Or I am not saying that I am something separate, another entity apart from this. I am saying I am the owner of this body. It is my body. Chandrakirti says, is that so? Is the chariot the owner of the parts? Is there such an owner? Is the chariot such an owner which says these are my parts? There's no such thing which owns the parts. Similarly, where is this entity which owns the body? I own it but that's the body which is saying it and behind it it's the mind which is saying it. Apart from that where is this owner? Owner, there is no chariot which is the owner of the parts. Fourth, there is no chariot which is the container of the parts. That means, is the chariot something like a basket in which all the parts are put? Is the chariot a thing in which the parts have been kept? No, there is no such chariot. Similarly, the self is not something in which the parts have been kept? No. There is no such chariot. Similarly, the self is not something in which the body-mind has been kept. Self is a container which has the body-mind, like a basket with flowers in it. So are you the Atma in which there is body, mind and thoughts and feelings? No, there is no such thing. You can't demonstrate. That's the fourth one. Fifth one, the opposite. The parts are not a container in which the chariot is there. Are the parts like a basket in which you have put a chariot? Keep the parts and then can you find something called the chariot in the parts? No. The body-mind, the Buddhists call it the skandhas, the five skandhas, pancha skandhas. The body mind aggregate, they use the word, English translation is aggregate. The body mind aggregate is not like a basket in which the self has been put. So the parts, the self does not contain the body mind, the body mind does not contain the self. Is the body mind like a basket in which the self is put? It's like, what I am asking is, here is the-mind in which you can find a liver or a kidney. Can you find a self? Is it taught in physiology class? Here is the liver and kidney and all of that and then there is one more self located just between the two kidneys or something like that. No, you can't find that. We say that it is in the Atma, in the heart. Well, which cardiologist will say I have discovered the self? Open heart surgery, you have to be careful not to touch the self. You have to cut the heart, don't cut the self. No, it is not an entity contained in the body-mind. Similar just as the chariot is not an entity contained in the parts of the chariot. That's five. Then, the sixth one is, the chariot is not a collection of its parts. If you take the parts and give a set, is it a chariot? No. Similarly, the self is certainly not a collection of body and mind. If you take a lot of organs and thoughts and feelings and emotions and say this is the set, is this the self? No. Nobody agrees. Even the dualistic schools will not agree to such a thing. The last one, the seventh one. Look, I am saying, you are just trying to confuse me. Chariot is when you connect the parts together, that shape is called the chariot. The shape of the parts is called the chariot. But which part looks like a chariot? Which part of the chariot has the shape like a chariot? No part. It's only a shape which emerges when you arrange them in a particular way. That shape does not belong to the parts. Similarly, you can't say that the self is the form which is generated by the arrangement of the parts of the body. Clearly the form belongs only to the body. Forget the mind. Mind is also not involved in the physical form. And that form continues to change. That cannot be the Self. Sevenfold reasoning. Sevenfold reasoning. There is no Atma. The body and mind are not the Atma. There is no Atma apart from body and mind and so on. The sevenfold reasoning Chandrakirti is called Chandrakirti's chariot. Notice one thing is missing in this chariot. If you look at the Kathopanishad chariot, there's the same chariot but the passenger is there. In Chandrakirti's chariot there's no passenger, self-driving car, Google car. Anyway so this was the tremendous challenge thrown by the Buddhists. Where is your precious self? Where is your Atma? Where is your God? Thousand-year fight. If you think arguments in Vedanta are subtle and sophisticated, they are childish compared to what went on between the Buddhists and the dualists. Between the Buddhist schools on one side, the Sautrantika, Vaibhashika, Yogachara, Vijnanavada, Shunyavada, Madhyamaka schools and later on this was all transmitted to Tibet. When finally the Nalanda University was destroyed by invaders and Buddhism was sort of reabsorbed back into Hinduism and disappeared from India. But the essential teachings were already spread to other parts of Asia but the deep philosophy was transmitted to Tibet and I learned recently how much of it has been transmitted to China. Very sophisticated Chinese Buddhism is there. All these things in China, in Chinese language. And Tibetans developed them further for 1000 years more. Great philosophers whom I had never heard of until I studied them last few months. Tsongkhapa, Mabja, and so many others. There is one philosopher called Tsongkhapa who is regarded like the Shankara of Tibet, of that category, of that level. So this was the Buddhist assault. Philosophy developed but then what is the truth then? Then comes the non-dualist. Swami Vivekananda says, the non-dualists come and say, they come and say, the dualists are not wrong, there is a self. But it's difficult to appreciate. Why? Swami Vivekananda says, imagine, most of us, we experience a world of change. This one, our lives. And a changing body and a changing mind. There are very few people who have experienced the calm ocean which lies beyond. It can be experienced. Yogis have experienced it. But that's not the common property of everybody. That's why Buddhism has a peculiar hold. It immediately appeals to us because it seems to be talking about our day to day experience. That's it. You don't have to, what the dualistic school said that that reality you have to take it on faith until you experience it. Whether you call it God or soul, you have to take it on faith. But that does not appeal so much, especially in today's age, when it's an age of reason and logic and science. It's Buddhism. In the West you will see it's especially America. Buddhism is very very popular. Any thoughtful person who is interested in spirituality almost always at least spend some time as a Buddhist. I met this gentleman in Hollywood. He used to come to the Vedanta Society, then he became a Buddhist, and then 20 years later he is back. And he said, see, the reason I am back to Vedanta is this, Buddhism is perfect, I really like it, but I missed God. I missed the old Karmajan. So Vedanta, there is one devotee, Peter Kowalski, he was interviewed once in Hollywood, what is this Vedanta you go to? He said think of Buddhism plus God, which is a nice way of putting it. So the non-dualist says, the dualist is right, there is a soul. I can see some people going, thank God. There is a soul, there is the ultimate unchanging reality behind all the change. But he says the Buddhist is also right. How? It is not true that there is a self or a soul apart from this. That there is this model, body, mind and self. No. It's not true that there is a snake apart from the rope. The classic snake and rope example. It's not true that there is a snake apart from the rope. That which is the rope is mistaken as the snake. And the rope is the truth about the snake. The snake is experienced, it may be false but it's still experienced. Similarly, what we experience as a mass of change, of karma, of birth and rebirth, of suffering and evil, that is the appearance which when investigated shows the reality of the calm ocean behind. It's not that this unchanging self and a changing world are different entities. It's not that the unchanging self and the changing body and mind are different entities. It's the same thing. One only appears as many. Swami Vivekananda says, another of his examples, the mass of waves and bubbles and foam in the ocean, thousands upon thousands and arising and disappearing and yet when you look at it as water, it's all one reality. Why would you say one reality? Why not, yes water is there but there are also thousands of waves. Not also. Philosophically one must be exact. If you say also that means water plus thousands of waves. No, because if you take the water away the waves do not exist. Actually Swami Vivekananda says this. If you take away the water from the ocean neither the waves will exist nor the ocean will exist. So in this ocean example the waves will exist nor the ocean will exist. So in this ocean example, the waves are us individual beings, what we consider ourselves to be now. The entire ocean is God, Ishwara. But beyond the individual beings and beyond God, underneath all of them, their reality, their inner reality, their intrinsic reality is one substance called water. One substance called water. From the perspective of water, non-dual. Non-dual means not two. No wave is a second independent reality apart from water. No individual is a second independent reality apart from Atman. Even God is not a second independent reality apart from the Atman. There is one unit, he uses this term, one unit existence. The Sanskrit for that is Sat, one being, one isness, which is also consciousness and that appears as many. Why does one appear? How do you explain if it's non-dual? How do you explain variety? How do you explain change? How do you explain all this good and evil? So the Advaitins have a very nice word for that. They call it Maya. What is Maya? Maya is that which makes the one non-dual reality appear as many. What's it made of? It's made of name and form. What makes the difference between one wave and the other wave? Between a wave and a bubble and a little bit of foam? It's a name, wave. And it's a form and an activity which we call wave. But none of it is possible without the water. Will the name and the activity of the wave remain if you take the water away? Nothing will remain. It will just disappear. So it is the water alone which appears as this. And this is Maya. Swami Vivekananda gives another example. One sun reflected in millions of globules of water appears as millions of suns but it's still that one sun. The globules of water are like name and form. He says one existence reflected in millions of globules of name and form appear as millions of beings. How can existence be reflected? It just means that existence is borrowed. How can existence be borrowed? It's nothing very complicated. It's just in the sense that the wave borrows its existence from the water. Without water, no existence of wave. Without that one unit existence, Sat, being or Brahman, we do not have our existence. All of us are that one reality. We are one as Brahman. So wait a minute, but you introduced Maya. Sat, Brahman, existence are one thing I understand. Atma, Sat, Brahman, existence fine. But you introduced Maya. So there are two things. and Swami Vivekananda says Maya does not exist by itself. It's not a second existence apart from the, from Brahman. Just as the name and form of the wave are not a second existence apart from water. It's not that there is water and there is something called name and form and you take them and put it here and you get a wave. No, because if you take name and form away from water, nothing, they disappear. So maya does not exist by itself, it's not a second independent existence, therefore you cannot charge us with duality. The two things, Brahman plus maya, No. It has no existence of its own. It's an appearance. Maya is also an appearance and all the products of Maya are an appearance. The world and action and birth and rebirth and individual beings are all an appearance. But it's not that it does not exist. Swami Vivekananda is clear on this point. It's not that Maya does not exist. Why? Seeing, this is exact words, seeing that it makes all this difference. All of our life is possible because of Maya. All happiness and misery and all Vedanta is possible because of Maya. All of this is possible because of Maya only. So because it makes all all this difference because we experience the reality as in this way, therefore we cannot say maya does not exist. We cannot say maya does exist also in the same way as Brahman. So this is called in Sanskrit anirvachanya. What does it mean? Inexpressible as existing or as non-existing. This curious in-between twilight state, this is Maya. I was reading some reminiscences, beautiful reminiscences written by Swami Chetananandaji about Swami Jagadananda. He was a disciple of the Holy Mother. He was the first one to translate the great master into English, Leela Prashangam into English Swami Jagadananda. So he says in one place he was a great non-dualist he says you know the secret of non-dualism is this Maya cause and effect appearance multiplicity all of these are just explanations. They are stories we tell the ignorant, the seeker, so that you have something to hold on to until you realize Brahman. Once you realize Brahman, all these are to be dispensed with. There is no cause, there is no effect. What is cause in Advaita Vedanta? Brahman plus Maya is defined as Ishwara. Ishwara is God. So God is Brahman plus Maya. The pure being with the power of Maya is the cause. Cause of what? Cause of this universe. All this material universe, all living beings, the Jeeva, all of us. Cause and effect. Cause is Ishwara, effect is this universe. Underneath both is Brahman, the absolute. But the reality is neither cause nor effect are real. It is just an explanatory mechanism, don't take it too seriously. Take only one thing seriously, that is Brahman. Then what becomes of all of this you explained, the dualist talked about? Birth and death and karma and heaven going to Brahma Loka and Pitri Loka, the different worlds being born as animals and birds and human beings and going life after life. All fairy tales. Swami Vivekananda says they are all children's tales that we tell each other. But he says be very careful. The modern materialist will say but that's what we are saying. All those heaven, hell, God all that is fantasy. It's just superstition. It's just fairy tales. Vivekananda says that's one big mistake that the moderns make. We consider all of this to be mythology except this life. What Advaita Vedanta is saying is that this life too is a mythology. All of it is mythology. He says it is all you my lord or all I. But this division between I and you, this duality is Maya. All that appears is I the self or if that's too much then all that appears is you my lord. That also is possible, that's the devotees attitude. Both are spiritual attitudes but I and you, this separation, this is samsara. We are one with the God of the universe, Swami Vivekananda says. Aham brahmahasmi. This is the solution of the non-dualist. When the question arises, all that is good to say. How can God commit sins? How can God do bad things? There is so much evil, the problem of evil and sin comes up. Swami Vivekananda is especially hard on this. He says, we see sin only when there is sin within us. And then he gives this cute example of the baby who is sitting in a room and there is a bag of gold there and a thief, robber comes and steals the bag of gold. But for the baby it is neither gold nor a robber. There is nothing particularly precious about the gold, there is nothing sinful about that person who is called a robber. No, there is no sin in the heart of the baby because of innocence, not because of Vedanta. And there is no sin in the heart of the enlightened person. Vivekananda says that it is a sin to call man a sinner. He says there that that man alone is a sinner who sees sin in others. You can imagine the devastating impact it would have had in 19th century America at that time. People were stunned but it gave them a new way of looking at religion and spirituality. So what happens to these heavens and hells? He says these are like dreams or hallucinations we see. When the mind is colored by wickedness, this reality itself appears to be hell. When the mind is colored by goodness, this reality itself appears to be Pitriloka or Brahmaloka, the world of Brahman or the world of the ancestors. And when this mind becomes enlightened enlightened it is all Brahman. God alone exists. So this is the idea of Advaita Vedanta. Advaita Vedanta what it does is divides into two levels. Ultimate truth, Paramarthika where Brahman alone exists and a Vyavaharika, transactional level of truth where all this, where even dualism is accepted as true. So this is the great conclusion. What is the result of this knowledge? Swami Vivekananda says that the result is all fear will go away. Whom to be afraid of? Who can harm me? I am immortal. Who can harm me? There is no second being apart from me. What do I need in this world? All desire will disappear for things of the world because I am all beings. All beings are appearances in me. All heavens and hells will cease. All desire will cease. All action prompted by desire will cease. And therefore the results of actions also will cease. With the disappearance of karma, life and death also disappear. And one radiant unity alone exists. That one radiant unity, that Brahman is the real man, the real person. Apparent and real. Swami Vivekananda says the reality is that. That is the reality spoken of by Advaita Vedanta. I remember there was this great philosopher in late 19th, early 20th century in Cambridge. F.H. Bradley. So there was a period of idealism in British philosophy up to the late 19th century, early 20th century before it was replaced by positivism and other things. So Bradley was one of the elder contemporaries of Moore and Russell and he wrote this book, a classic called Appearance and Reality which is very Vedantic and we had it in our library. I remember when I was a novice about 20 years ago in the Bellarmat library, an old copy with little holes made by insects. But when I started reading it, I found it amazing. It is two parts, appearance and reality. So first part is appearance and the way he argues to show that what we experience in the world, it must be an appearance, it can't be real in itself. It's so Vedantic. And I remember we used to have this professor who would come and teach us, Nirodhwaran Chakravarti, he was a retired professor of philosophy in I think Jadavpur University. He was a disciple of Swami Abhedananda. So, wonderful, very good teacher. A short man, big eyes, booming voice. Old gentleman. He would come and I asked him, Sir, can you teach me this book, Appearance and Reality? The old man was so delighted. He said, Maharaj, I was not yet a monk, Brahmachari. Maharaj, you want to read this? Nobody wants to read these books today. Nobody wants to read these things today. I will certainly teach you. And the old man, he gave up something which is very valuable for Indians, the afternoon siesta. He used to come to our monastery and he would rest in the afternoon and then afterwards he would teach us philosophy. So he gave up that gave up that, he said if you are willing to give it up, I am also willing to give it up and he would teach me Bradley. So in the monastery on the bank of the Ganga, we are studying this late 19th century British philosopher. I got only up to appearance, I didn't get to the reality part. But this is the reality according to Vivekananda. It was just a couple of months back, it was amazing, at a philosophy class on Buddhism at Harvard in the philosophy department there, Divinity School there. So Professor Garfield was talking about the Shunyavada Buddhism. He said, have any of you heard about Bradley? And there's all these graduate students and PhD candidates sitting there all scratching their heads. It's an early English philosopher, early 20th century English philosopher F.H. Bradley, Appearance and Reality. Anybody read it? So I said, yes. This is weird orange guy who's the only one who is there. And the professor was so happy and he said you should all read it. You can see the similarities in thought there. This is the reality according to Advaita Vedanta. This one radiant unity which exists everywhere. Even now we just don't see it. Now Vivekananda says very quickly, Vivekananda says, what next? Two questions arise. One question is, can we experience this? By the way, he gives other nice examples in between. So many examples in metaphors and similes. He says, all this change, this change is like you're reading a book, page after page of the book of life turns and chapter after chapter turns. But you are not changing. You are the same person who is reading. It is the book which is changing. Then he gives an example of the train, railway. He travelled across this country by train. So he says the fields, they seem to be moving. But actually it is the train which is moving, not the fields. And one more, the sun and the earth. So when you stand and look, it seems the sun is rising and circling across the earth and setting in the west, but it is the earth's motion which is falsely ascribed to the sun. But the fact is, if we knew, we would know that it's not the sun which is moving, but it's the earth which is moving. Subtle point here which I like very much. This great philosopher Wittgenstein, one day, he was walking outside the class, after the class in Cambridge, and this lady who has written this, she was walking with him, and he looked up at the sun and he said, why did the ancients think that the sun moved from east to west? It doesn't move, it's the earth which is rotating. Why did the ancients think that? The lady said, but professor, that's what it looks like. That's what they thought, it looks like that. Then he said, ah, but if it did not, what would it look like? But if it was the other way around, if the earth were moving and not the sun, what would it look like? It would look exactly the same. Why is this important? If it is true that you are Brahman, immortal, one existence, consciousness, bliss, what would the world look like? Like this. You say, no, no, this world is real, I am separate, all of this is there. Why? It looks like that. If you are Brahman and world is appearing because of Maya, what would it look like? Like this. That is one of the most powerful arguments in favour of Advaita Vedanta. See often religion and science are at loggerheads. Religion says my book says this, science says we have discovered things which makes your book wrong. And then religion feels sort of duty bound, tradition bound or bound just by fear and superstition to hold on to what I have read in my book. The thing we are afraid of is if I admit one thing is wrong in the book, the whole thing might be wrong. Who knows? So I am unable to let go of even one little superstition in my book in terror of what might happen. But science has proven it to be wrong. Advaita Vedanta is not like that. It is based on your experience and understanding. This experience and the understanding provided by the texts. You see it in an entirely new paradigm. By the way, let me introduce one more little insight I got from some of the readings there at Harvard. Realization. You might not think that Harvard University professors are sitting and talking about enlightenment, but they are actually. So here was one interesting discussion. Enlightenment. Of course, the discussion was in the Buddhist context. That was the course. But it equally applies to Advaita Vedanta. What is enlightenment? How do we understand enlightenment? Two models. One is called the epistemic shift model, another one is called the ethical manifestation model. What does it mean? Epistemic shift means, I was thinking of myself as this little creature, body and mind, birth and death, pleasure and pain and suffering, struggling through life. This is one idea of myself, my understanding. Now it shifts. I am that one unchanging light, this awareness, this existence consciousness which is clear to me now. Suppose this shift happens. This is enlightenment. So this is one kind of enlightenment. This is one way of looking at enlightenment. An epistemic shift. Epistemic means knowledge, a change in our paradigm about ourselves, what we thought about ourselves has undergone a revolutionary shift, sudden shift and permanent. It comes in a flash but it remains stable, just like our idea of ourselves right now is stable, I am a body-mind stable. But once the shift happens, that also is stable. That I am this witness consciousness, this awareness, this existence consciousness place. This is one way of understanding enlightenment. Epistemic shift model. The second way of understanding enlightenment is, again it was in the Buddhist context, this idea of the Buddha nature which is within all of us, manifesting that love and unselfishness and overcoming desire and serenity and peace and joy, compassion for all beings, what we would regard a great saint as having, the manifestation of those qualities, divine qualities in life. This is called the ethical manifestation model. Now what Vivekananda is saying, so up to this much was the paper which we discussed. But Vivekananda is saying both of these are enlightenment. His beautiful definition, religion is the manifestation of the divinity already within us. Now look at that, we memorize this this it's a very simple definition how profound it is. There is an epistemic shift I am Brahman not I am body-mind I am Brahman not I am mortal I am immortal not I am flesh and blood I am awareness not I am flesh and blood, I am awareness. Not I am changing moment to moment, I am the unchangeable reality. Not I am going around in the world with a begging bowl, give me happiness, give me a little praise, give me a little fulfillment. No, I am the source of all peace and fulfillment. It's mine, it's coming back to me from the world. So that's the epistemic shift. And the other side, Swami Vivekananda says, is manifestation. It must be reflected in my thought, in my words, in my deeds. Swami Vivekananda says, for such a person, such a person, the thoughts will be automatically good. The words of such a person will be blessings. The actions of such a person will be blessings. The actions of such a person will be blessings. In fact, this person will be a living blessing for everybody around. This is the ethical manifestation model. So both, this is enlightenment. I know I am Brahman and also able to manifest it in my life. So what a very beautiful insight. This is why Vivekananda asks,, what will happen after this question? We are all eager to know, now I have understood. Brahma, Jnana, enlightenment, God Realization. Next, next, what will happen next? Far ahead, but anyway, what will happen next? One of the professors used to ask this question. So Vivekananda says there are two great questions. One is, is it practical? Is it possible to realize this? Second, what will happen after this? So, very quickly, one of the professors asked this question. He is fond of asking this question at Harvard. How many people get enlightenment? Very few. So is it worth pursuing? How many? Even optimistic figure, how many will get enlightenment? Why should we pursue this very rare case? So he asked me. I gave him two answers and then he gave me a beautiful third answer. So I will give you all three. The first answer which I usually give is that all of us will get enlightenment. Only it may take many lifetimes. Since you are Brahman according to Advaita Vedanta, what can stop you? It is your greatest birthright. It is very natural that one day or the other we will all realize our real nature that we are one with God. That all of this is the manifestation of Brahman. It is Brahman. We will realize it. So that's one. We all will get enlightenment, not one. But who knows? Sri Ramakrishna used to say in Benares, in Kashi, which is the place of Annapurna, Divine Motherhood gives food, all will be fed. Nobody will go hungry. Nobody will go hungry, but some get food in the morning, some in the afternoon. Don't worry, everybody will get food in the afternoon. But some will get food in the afternoon, some will have to wait till sunset, till evening. But they will all get food. What does it mean? All will get liberation. Some here itself. Some at the end of their lives, some maybe next life. Some at the end of the universe, at the end of the cosmic cycle. That's evening. That's God's evening. All the ones who are remaining, alright, three, on sale now, before I shut down the shop for this time. So, that's one answer. The second answer I gave was, once you have understood what spiritual life is, what else will you do? What else will you do except pursue enlightenment? Maybe you will not get enlightenment. What else will you do? What else will you do except pursue enlightenment? Maybe you will not get enlightenment. What else will you do except pursue this? What else is worthwhile? Everything else in life will go on, but this will become your central pursuit. What else is worth doing? Then he said, those are good answers Swami, but they are sort of ultimate, abstract philosophical answers. Let me give you a practical answer. Why one should pursue enlightenment? What is that? He said, once you start, whether you get enlightenment or not, day to day the benefits that flow, the peace and the joy and the sense of security and strength, sense of protection, it slowly becomes the most valuable thing in your life. Whether enlightenment is there or not, we don't know, but you can never let go of it anymore. I like that answer. That's a very practical answer. And for most people, that's how we are continuing actually. So, what happens? Is it practical? Yes. Swami Vivekananda said, in fact in that lecture he said, By the touch of such extraordinary persons exist who have realized it. And in fact I met one such person and by his touch my entire life was transformed. I will tell you about him next Sunday. He said in that talk. Which means he must have talked about Sri Ramakrishna in the next Sunday lecture. I will speak about him next Sunday. Now what will happen after enlightenment? Swami Vivekananda gives two examples. I'll give those and I will stop there. The two examples are one the example of two wheels which are going and connected by a pole, they are rolling along. You take an axe and cut the pole and one wheel stops, the other goes on rolling for a while and then falls. Similarly, one of the wheels is the real self, pure consciousness and the other one is the apparent self, the ego connected with body and mind, the one which is changing all the time, the one which we think we are. One is the real thing which we are, Brahman, the other one is the Jiva, the apparent self. And they are connected. How? By no connection at all. The only connection is ignorance. When you cut the pole which connects, which is no pole at all, it's just ignorance. In Hindi they say, Bevkufi matra hai. It's only foolishness which connects the two. Ignorance shows you, I have never been that other wheel. I am Brahman. Once you do that, it's cut, but the other wheel will not stop. It will go on, the force of karma is upon it. It will roll a little more and then come to a stop. Same example I found in Buddhism, Tibetan Buddhism. Very interesting. They call it the example of the strong potter. So the potter makes a pot and the potter's wheel is there. The strong potter gives a very strong push to it. Then he gets up and goes. The wheel will not stop immediately. Two or three times it will go around and then fall. Similarly, body-mind will continue because of past karma. And this body-mind continuing because of past karma, this is called Jeevan Mukti, enlightened while living. And Swami Vivekananda says this is the goal of Vedanta. The goal of Vedanta is not to become Brahman. You are Brahman already. The goal of Vedanta is to realize that you are Brahman and continue in this way as long as it will continue. These are the enlightened beings of this world. You are still continuing in this body and mind but you know that you are not it. You are Brahman. And as long as this body and mind lasts, it is a great blessing to everybody in this world. The second example he gives is of the mirage. He says, when I was travelling in the western part of India, the deserts of Rajputana, I would see these beautiful lakes in the distance. One day I was thirsty and I went up to one of those lakes and I saw it was just shimmering air, there is no water there at all. And I realized, oh, this is the mirage which I have read about. Then I started walking again and the mirage came back. But now I know it's a mirage. And he says that similarly, after enlightenment, the world will come back. There will be the world appearance, body appearance, thoughts will be there. Everything will come back as it is. But he says weakened, the poison will be gone from it. The chains of karma will be much weaker. They cannot bind you anymore. Sri Ramakrishna gives the example of a rope which is burnt and yet retains its shape. It looks like a black chain of, it's just ash but it looks like a rope. He says it cannot bind anybody. In fact if you blow on it, it will fly away into ashes. Similarly, body, mind, ego, all will appear but it cannot do anything to you anymore. That is living while free. This mirage example, this beautifully worked out mirage example in detail was given by Professor Garfield in one of his articles, which I liked very much. So I told him in the class that I'm going to steal this. And he said examples are meant to be stolen so good luck to you. So I'm going to use it now. If he's watching, thank you very much. He says, driving in the desert, say in Arizona, if you're driving there, where is the desert? Arizona and Nevada. Now there are these mirages, there are different kinds of drivers. One is the new driver, who does not understand it. So he is driving and what does he see? Water! Oh there is water there in the road, shimmering there. And it has to be explained to him that it's not what it looks like that it's a it's a mirage. We the ignorant people are like that. We think here is the world. It's like a mirage but it's actually we think take it to be real. There's a second type of driver who is the one who wears polarized glasses. This is his addition to the example. He says he wears polarized glasses. Now they didn't have polarized glasses in Buddha's time or Shankara's time. So he wears polarized glasses. In fact it seems if you wear those glasses you cannot see the illusion also. So polarized glasses are there. You can see everything but you will not see the illusion, the mirage you will not see. So you will see neither water nor mirage, nothing. He just says what, what are you talking about, nothing. That is like the yogi who is in Nirvikalpa Samadhi. What world? Body, mind, world, nothing is there. So you are immersed in Samadhi, world disappears. Nothing is seen. You remain as the Atman. That's the yogic approach. Second. Third one. Is the person who has read about a mirage, who has understood. Driving along, he sees water. Oh water. Then he remembers, no, no, no. Mirage. This is how it's happening. It looks like water. He thought it was water. And now it still looks like water, but he knows the theory behind it. Who is that? Professor. Who has read about it and understood it, that it is Brahman. Because of name and form it all appears as good and bad human beings and all of these. Appearing like that, affecting me, I know the theory. But practically it's not working. It still looks like that, looks like a real world for me. Not only world looks real, body looks real and feels real to me, mind feels real to me, desires and frustrations and unhappiness, I know these are all appearances in one radiant awareness. But still feels real and hurts. I know the theory, but it looks like this. He says this is the level of the professor. Of the seeker, we are understanding all of this but when we come into contact with life, when we see the thing, we don't see mirage, we see water. And then we remember and understand the theory, mirage. Still helpful, good. We now begin to understand what it is. And the last one is the enlightened being who sees, who does not even see the water. He sees, but he sees mirage. It is so practiced, so natural, he sees that here is an appearance. Here is maya doing its job. That sadhu who came to Dakshineshwar and who would sit in his room and meditate all day long. Once in a while he would come in his room and meditate all day long. Once in a while he would come out and clap and dance with joy. Wah, kya maya, what maya this is. The sky and the Ganga and the river and the temple. It's all Brahman but it's appearing like this. Wonderful maya, wonderful. Expert, expert driver. He does not say here is the river but it is actually name and form river. Really it is, let me read, this one is like this. No, for him automatically here is Brahman. But it appears like a river. What Maya, how beautiful, wonderful. And they would go back to his room and meditate again. So that is the level of the expert driver. We are now at the level, most of us, we are at the level of the driver who has read the book about the mirage. Now we are driving but we are experiencing it again and again, getting problems. But afterwards, enlightenment is, we will still see the same thing but we know it to be an appearance, a maya. What happens then? What good is it? Swami Vivekananda gives another of his beautiful examples. What good is it if you ask? He says, first of all, why should it be any good? Truth is good for its own sake. We should know the truth for its own sake. He gives the example of a baby. For the baby, the candies are the most important thing. A little child. And if you teach the baby about electricity are the most important thing, a little child. And if you teach the baby about electricity, which was the latest technology at that time, because Swami Vivekananda had met Tesla, I think he had met Edison too, but I am not sure. Swami Abhidharananda had met Edison. Edison took him to his lab, there is a description. Edison gave him one of the first gramophones too, which is there in Calcutta in the monastery now. Some say it still plays. So he had learnt about electricity. So he would use that latest example. Nowadays no doubt he would talk about iPhones and all these things today if he had used that example. He says if we try to explain about electricity to a child, the child will say what good is it? Will it give me a candy? We are like that. We are like that. I have no time to dilate upon this. Think about it. I noticed it. I mentioned it at the Divinity School also. Here we are studying religion. But the entirety is what good will religion do to us? Will it solve, how to use religion to solve global warming? How to use religion, redefine religion to fit with LGBTQ? How to use religion to implement it in politics of my liking? All these are, will it give me candy? If it doesn't, it's no good. I am not saying I am against this. This has to be done. Religion has to be useful to us in our society, in our day and our time. What is our problem, religion should be able to help us to solve it, no doubt. But this is the secondary, the by-product, the side benefits. The real benefit is what Buddha said, solving suffering at the deepest possible level. So, Swami Vivekananda says, it does good, it does the greatest good. His love, the highest of things, he says, He alone loves who sees God in all beings. That person alone loves who sees God in friend and foe. The husband loves the wife the more by seeing God in the wife. The wife loves the husband more by seeing God in the husband. The parents love the children the more by seeing God in the children. People love a holy person more by seeing God in the children. People love a holy person more by seeing God in the holy person. And the same people love the unholy person also, seeing God in the unholy person. The person loves, you will love your friend more by knowing that the friend is nothing other than God. And you will love your greatest enemy too by knowing that that enemy is nothing other than God. This is the benefit. He says, if even a small fraction of humanity were to realize some of these truths, then this earth itself would be transformed into heaven. You're talking about what benefit will it give to society? Yes. Very inspiring, soaring words. He says then what will society be like? Then gods will love gods, gods will be playing with gods, gods will be working with gods. It transforms the human into divine. This will be the benefit of this great philosophy. Hitherto this philosophy Vivekananda says was restricted to a very few even in the land of its birth. But now the time has come to broadcast it across the world. And nowadays he would be very happy with YouTube and all of this. The day will come, I pray to the Lord that the day will come when this great truth will become the common property of humanity and the very air of our societies will be surcharged with that thou art. Tat Tvam Asi Tat Tvam Asi Om Shanti Shanti Shanti Hari Om Tat Sat Shri Ram Krishnaupanamastu.
 Music Om Asato Maa Sadgamaya Tamaso Maa Jyotir Gamaya Mrityor Maa Amritam Gamaya Om Shanti Shanti Shanti He Today we are going to discuss Vedanta and Neuroscience. Some aspects of Neuroscience where Yoga and Vedanta are contributing substantially and this is the way we sort of combine the first person and third person perspectives. So as to get a very solid chunk of knowledge, you know, you must have heard of the term neurophenomenology, just today morning she was in the conference where I spoke. So we were discussing all these things that how do we combine the first person and third person perspectives in order to get all possible knowledge on matters like mind management, consciousness, the brain science, how does it work, how does it function, the perceptive process, what is at the heart of it. We already studied some of this in these classes. basically it is analyzing human experience how does it happen now at the heart of any experience you take any of your experiences let us just think about a few things think of a beautiful sunset you are watching it, it produces such a calm state of mind. Think of a beautiful flower which simply moves you, which is red in color, bright, any of these experiences and think of the crispiness of French fries which you all like . Now, you see these are all experiences with you right, even when you imagine it, it is with a considerable investment of vital energy, it appears like an end live and something to you . So, they are what exactly is the cause for experiences what we have been studying. And you know the process which science tells you it comes up to the functioning of the human brain where the entire electromagnetic signal is falling on yourthe cortex brain cortex and the neurochemical reactions are happening and somehow you happen to get a complete image or an experience of the thing which you are happening and somehow you happen to get a complete image or an experience of the thing which you are perceiving. Now to this Yoga Vedanta is in addition adding that mind has suffered a modification due to that object because you are taking in through multiple senses the experience of the object further modification, mind is always in a state of flux. And then consciousness is illuminating the vritti in the mind due to that perception and thus you are coming to know what that object is through a process of recognition many times you say oh this is that particular flower you are able to recognize it. So, this is how the perception is taking place. Few points which you should note here is mindfulness absolutely necessary, awareness absolutely necessary, otherwise you are not going to experience perception, you are you are not going to experience anything out of it. You may hold something in your memory, but if you are not experiencing it, what is the point? Life is about experience, is not it? Now, what is what exactly is happening in your brain? This is also something which we should study a bit at least. See simple electromagnetic radiation getting converted into an experience in your system. What is the brain doing all along these processes? We will go a little into the neuroscience of it. See your brain has specialized neural cells called neurons. Yes, all of you have studied something of this in school days and they have a number of they create a dendritic tree which you call learning. There are axons root like connections called axons add on and then at locations called synapses and the whole an entire network, an assembly of interconnected neuronal activities going on at any point in your brain. This is the picture of your learning mechanism. I can show you a picture of it so that you understand better neurophysiologically how complex the process is, but it appears something easy for you because you are seeing it from the first person perspective. But neurophysiologically please see those matrix like assemblies there are your that is what you call learning, the neural networks which your neurons have made and a single neuron looks like that. So, the neuronal activity in your brain, what does it do? It creates the neural pathways which are part of your learning process and this has given us what is called evolutionary priority, the evolutionary edge that you are able to consciously create the kind of neural pathways you want. There is a self interconnecting the entire process. This may appear strange to you a self connecting the entire process, what I mean to say is the learning the network that is getting created there is experienced by you further on due to the presence of your awareness. So, awareness is participatory in the sense you are your mental awareness is invested in your thought process in your learning mechanism. So, due to the this entire process you are perceiving, you are knowing, you are thinking, you are having memory, you are having metacognitions, you are able to do everything. The difference between you and Sophia is this much only she is not experiencing anything, she is working and she can do very wonderful tasks like even play a game of chess with you and win. You know Sophia? Yes. Like, even play a game of chess with you and win, you know Sophia? And yeah, and she can do almost everything that you can do, but based on a program, based on her software. And she can even do decisions, make decisions based on the past programming that has been put into her. So, everything she can do only thing is she has no sense of herself, she has no self-awareness, she is not experiencing anything, she is just performing tasks as per your program. So, this is the difference between the human experience and an inanimate object performing tasks for you, the difference between you and a robot. Now, once you see this for yourself, you will understand self-awareness is the essential thing, the essential fact about the human experience which gives you the evolutionary edge. You evolve as you become more and more self-aware. The simple process of self-awareness has given you this experience of life. Suppose you augmented that awareness, it will give you a bigger slice of life, is not it? You see conscious experiences, because you are having conscious experiences life is so wonderful. Suppose you augmented that level of consciousness, awareness, basic mental awareness, you will have a bigger experience of life. So this is exactly what yoga aims at doing. By actually changing your enhancing or augmenting your awareness, what is it trying to do making you more alive from within which is giving you a totally different perception of life different experiences of life. So, this entire process has been studied in a wonderful way today morning we were also discussing the techniques of yoga the speciality of these sciences which developed here are they consider awareness to be essentially apart from mind function also. The investiture has come in the form of reflected awareness in the mind, but essentially what we are calling consciousness pure consciousness is behind the mind, it is illuminating the mind from behind and so, the mind appears conscious. So, conscious experience tracking it is foundation it is very base is the the essential research in yoga and vedant hm before it is it gets invested into the thought process how does it? How can you turn it back upon itself and how can you enhance it, augment it so as to increase your experience, the level of your experience? So, these are all the things which we were discussing and working upon. Now, here I will I would like to give you 10 characteristics of special characteristics you can say specially ah it is available to the human experience all these characteristics of the human brain, where neurology neurophysiology contributes immensely in our understanding of these processes as well as yoga vedanta. So, you see combining subjective and objective sciences gives you enormous knowledge. This is a particular area where you can take from both the streams. We will study one by one these processes. You see the simple fact of deliberation. Just let me introduce you to these neurophysiological characteristics of the human brain. The very first one which we will study is deliberation, then intuition, then metacognition, social cognition, mirroring and emotional contagion, memory salience, reward circuitry, in group versus out group bias, mindfulness and self-awareness. These are unique characteristics of the human brain. Do not think any other brain is deliberating the way you do or has intuitions the way you do or has all these characteristics the way you do. So, since they are unique to the human brain, what does neuroscience say about them, how it is happening because they will give you the third person perspective and Yoga Vedanta will give you the first person perspective. So, you can amass a huge amount of knowledge on the working of your brain and the phenomenon of experience which is so unique to the human mind. So, we will try to understand it in both ways. Let us take up the very first thing which is deliberation. What is deliberation? To deliberate upon something means to cogitate to think about something deeply, to apply rational conscious thought to something. Now, this is a huge network in the human brain. How exactly the thought process takes place. What is its difference from intuition? How is it different from intuition? Intuition, apne suna hai na? The term, it means knowing something by insight without deliberation. So, these two have to be studied together. You are just knowing without deliberating as an insight without the use of conscious without the use of rational thought even. So, how are you able to do this? These are supposed to be from the neurophysiological standpoint, these are two separate networks in the human brain. If you take fMRI scans of these processes, you will find there are two separate networks and intuition especially is used ah so much in both science and these mystical traditions like yoga vedanta that more attention today is focused on this aspect. You see where exactly does it occur according to neurophysiology? It occurs intuition I am speaking of, it occurs in the amygdala, anterior insula, ventral, occipitotemporal regions and the median OFC, there is the orbitofrontal cortex of the brain. This is whenever there is an episode of intuition and intuitive awareness about something. These are the areas which get where the neurons are firing. Now, the intuitive process itself it is a real miracle, how does it happen without even giving enough thought, without giving thought to something. You know some of the greatest discoveries of science have come by intuition, if you study the history of science greatest discoveries of science have come by intuition hm. If you study the history of science and of course, mystical traditions rely heavily on these intuitions. Every mystical tradition will give you a method, yoga essentially gives you methods, but it will finally, say that intuitively the experience itself is intuitive Vedanta will that is why say it is a mystical experience. So, through a process of deliberation you can come to a point where you have a flashing intuition that is the point. So, since both of these ah an unsolicited insight as it were undeliberated insight you since you arrive at this point what is happening in neurophysiologist fully they are not able to explain these pathways of intuition. The study is going on still a lot of research is going on this because this is a very important point for both the scientists and the mystics. In yoga and Vedanta you have certain wonderful observations which I would like to tell you. See it is a it is a matter of which has intrigued both philosophers and scientists, but where yoga has to contribute here is it will tell you the the gap that you feel ah when you are analyzing experience. It is because you have not understood the connection between this hardware and software. The brain is functions like a hardware, I told you. What is happening correspondingly in the mind that is little understood. So, some kind of a penetrative insight that is why you did a foothold outside the normal processes of the mind and the brain. Many scientists have commented on this you know and I told you about George Walss statement he said that to solve the major mysteries of science you need a foothold outside science, you need a foothold in the infinite actually to throw light on this. So, this comes only by the power of intuition how exactly it is taking place. Even in the great mystical traditions of both the east and the west they are giving you analytical tools as well as pointing out to the fact that the ultimate experience is intuitive it is mystical. You just arrive at the truth directly without without a process even. I discussed one or two of the deliberate analytical tools with you initially, do you remember hm like for example, you have a sense of I persisting all the time although your body and mind has has changed immensely. Right from the time you are born the sense of I-ness remains with us the same I although everything about us has changed. Now, this is an analytical tool to help you understand there is a continuum running through you consciousness is the continuum. Even mind activity is fragmented is not it, but consciousness is always a continuum. Now, this is an if you analyze this how this experience takes place you will come to this understanding, but if you still are asking for the experience takes place you will come to this understanding. But if you still are asking for the experience of it you know some people come to the insight through the deliberation directly, but if you are still asking for an experience then you have to build up your intuition this is what they will tell you through some form of yogic method which is given. So, like this a number of analytical tools are available in our scriptures. One more thing which I told you, you see you are aware of your body, the movements of your hands, the movements of your face, but you the body is not aware of you, which means awareness belongs to the subject which is functioning apart from the body. This is a powerful analytical tool to help you understand that you are indeed somebody who is functioning through this instrumentation, but to bring you to the experience of the self again you need a tremendous intuition to come into this understanding. So, you can combine these two, these two networks that is why from the yoga Vedanta standpoint, they are not two separate networks, they complement each other and they will help each other. If you develop your analytical tools, at some point there will be a flashing intuition into the heart of reality. So, this is something we can understand from both the neuroscientific and yoga vedanta standpoints regarding deliberation and intuition. Let us take up the next one which is metacognition. What is metacognition? It is thinking about your thinking and you do not just think linearly you know in metacognition you think from all possible angles, you take all perspectives, motivations, assumptions, possible biases into consideration and you are thinking. Now, neurophysiologically this is explained as you know it is like a you can say network of regions in your brain working in concert. Due to this, this is happening and in a way in certain areas of your brain information itself is processed hierarchically. So, one part of your brain is in a way acknowledging what the other part of the brain is doing . Yoga Vedanta will add something more to this it will say you see the very fact that you can metacognize or have memory shows that there is an underlying reality to the two streams of thought, there is an underlying substratum. Otherwise, how do you know, how do you metacognize, how will you have memory? So, it is indirectly pointing to the fact of awareness being present, that is why you are able to do these functions, that is why the brain is able to are you getting the point. Metacognition thinking about thinking unless there is a common factor to the two streams of thought how can it be possible, this is what they are pointing out to. And something more they will add to this how do you know you are thinking about your thinking the fact of metacognition hm somewhere there is a detached observer thinking about what you had been thinking. So, however, you explain it you have to understand that at the heart of any form of perception or thought is awareness according to Vedanta you know even they analyze the state of Sushupti in order to derive a tremendous possibility why are they analyzing the state of deep sleep what will they tell you see in that state of deep sleep the mind shuts down and that is why you are not experiencing objects, but some level of experience you have. You are experiencing the absence of objects, is not it? And you have the experience of deep restfulness. So, it is still an experience and you have been present. So, it is not an inference, it is not a metacognition, it is an experience, it is an experience of absence, it is not an absence of experience. That is why it is not an inference. The entity who would later infer has experienced the absence of objects and has experienced a deep state of restfulness. That is why the study of Sushupti is so important in Vedanta. It is pointing to something far more fundamental to your thought activity, is not it? So, that is how you see you can combine subjective and objective sciences in studying any single activity of your brain. They have more and more insights to throw. Let us go to the next one what is called social cognition. This is a very important aspect of you because ah whether you like it or not, you know your social cognitions build your self the ego complex. You are perceiving yourself as you are being perceived. This is your sense of yourself usually to an uninvestigated mind, this is the only sense of itself which it will it will have, what others think of me is what I am. So, the social cognition aspect of the human brain is very important, this is supposed to be the default network of the human brain, you know always it is very sensitive to social cognition and social relationships that is why play a huge role here. Social knowledge itself is processed very differently compared to non social knowledge in the human brain. See this is an important neuro physiological point which you should understand. What is the meaning of social knowledge? Like for example, how I am perceived by my friend, how much my friend loves me is more important to you than how do I find my way to IIT using the GPS, because there the eye sense is not directly involved, but in a process of social knowledge it is involved, are you getting the point. See social knowledge means basically your ego, how is it being yourself, how you are being perceived by others. Now this holds dominance over your mind, this is your actual sense of self, I am repeating the thing because you must catch the point exactly. Now this holds such dominance over your brain that non-social knowledge like finding your way somewhere or some information, the mathematics that you do, physical laws which you understand, all this become secondary compared to my social cognition. This is how your brain takes it. So, why even social pain you know, suppose you suffer an embarrassment or somebody insults you, that is equivalent in neuro chemical intensity to actual pain of getting beaten or getting tortured it is equivalent in neuro chemical intensity to that why this is the way your brain takes it that is why social cognition is such an important aspect of you it is important to understand it. Now, Yoga Vedanta also understands the validity of this, because as long as the self is not recognized, you are functioning as an ego, the ego complex is very active, and it is built on social cognition. So, understanding this, it survives on networking, that is why mental networking, your concept of yourself is what others are thinking about you. This is the normal uninvestigated minds condition. So, since ego is part of the sukshma sharir and mind is one huge network the concept of social cognition is held very important even in yoga vedanta in the sense this ego has to mature into knowledge about itself. So, having a mature ego which understands its masks its ways of working is important in these mind sciences also. If it is a very immature ego it will keep reacting to outer circumstances without trying to understand itself. So, social cognition is a valid stand which both these disciplines analyze in a deep way. Your sense of yourself why should it be determined by others, because you have no sense of yourself from your own first person standpoint, this is what ultimately yoga will point out to. So, to get this sense at least some amount of yoga requires to be practiced, so that you are independent of the opinions of others about you, this becomes an important in social relationships tomorrow in your workplace, all these things will become important. Because really I am telling you, if you cannot control your mind at a particular level, even a single wrong word or a single critical remark about you can simply put you down, is not it. So, all these things can work ferociously over you if you do not have this inner sense of detachment and if you do not understand this concept properly. So, this is important again to both the disciplines. There is ongoing research on all of this. I am just giving you currently how they are thinking about it. Then we have this very important concept of mirroring and emotional contagion. This is a very important concept you must pay attention to it. Let me first show you a slide. You see mirror neurons are specialized brain cells in the premotor cortex which are seen to fire during goal oriented actions as well as the observations observation of similar actions which means if you are seeing something it is equivalent to doing it performing it that is the effect neuro from the neuro physiological standpoint seeing is doing you are experiencing the actual thing. Look at this this is actually the neurological basis of empathy imitation all this you see a small baby look at the picture there, it will simply imitate what the other person is doing. Because the mirror neurons in his brain are actually catching that emotion and it will mirror it perfectly without any training, without thinking this is the capacity of mirror neurons in the brain. What the implications of this are response is similar for performing the action, witnessing the action and hearing about the action and that is how mirror neurons enable empathy, skill building through mimicry as well as vicarious experiences. Some more information let me give you on this. See observation of an action due to the presence of mirror neurons automatically triggers its simulation . Thus mirror neurons provide a neural basis for all empathetic processes. The mirror neuron system is active when a person performs an action as well and as when he only witnesses an action being performed. In essence the this mirror neuron system explains why a person may wins when he sees another person being beaten. You have experienced this somebody is suffering something, but you also feel very shaken. You saw a very beautiful scene in a movie, you you feel a happy state of mind. In fact, the fact why you have gone to a movie is to experience the emotions going on there hm. So, it is due to the activity ofysiological standpoint, perception is actually performance, is not it? From the neurophysiological standpoint, you are experiencing the thing neurophysiologically. So, that is the, that is why they ah emotional contagion is so very important. Emotions are contagious, they are influential and there is a literal correspondence between the brain processes occurring in different individuals via near mirror neurons. There is a actual correspondence somebody feels very bad somewhere it will affect you in some way due to this mirror neuron effect. So, now this mirror neurons have been deeply understood in yoga psychology also, they have not given them the term mirror neurons, but the importance of I always told you the senses the intake through the senses decides the nature of your mind, it will decide the content of your mind. Why? You will mirror what you have been seeing, after sometime it becomes part of your being. So, this is based on you see you have the perfect neurophysiological correlate for this aspect of your being, this aspect of your experience through the mirror neurons. That is why careful ways of living. You can either use your mind as a gold mine, you can make it a gold mine or you can make it a dustbin, you can make it anything. In our culture there have been a number of stories on this. You see let me tell you a story here for you to understand if you keep focused on right things you know you will actually become like that. There was a prince who was who whose father had a huge kingdom and this prince was growing up he will become the next king the only problem with this prince was he was physically very weak, very very weak. He looked like a small boy and no energy and very thin and not putting up weight and nobody could find out what is the problem with him. They tried all sorts of fire way then whatever was available, but nothing worked on him. So, the king was very worried, how will this boy manage this kingdom tomorrow if his health remains like this. So, he called all the courtiers, he called meetings of the doctors available at that time, all that. And then one wise courtier advised him, you see you just put a, make a huge image of Hanumanji and put it in his room. So, after a one month or so, huge idol of Hanumanji was put in that child's room, in the princess room. And every day because he was already of a devotional nature, he would see and he would that the impact of that image on his mind, you see that well developed muscular body and absolutely strong biceps and the look of confidence and devotion on the face all this affected his mind so much that within a months time after this his health started improving . His health became better and better because he looked upon him as the ideal. The impact on the mind becomes such by your exposures by whatever you that is why you know role models become very important. They actually change your neural chemistry and through the mirror neuron effect they will change your behavior. What do you take as your role models? what do you adore and value in life, it is your tomorrow you are going to be like that. So, all this becomes very important due to this mirror neuron mechanism of the human brain. This is so widely spread and the boy actually developed the characteristics of great physical strength, he developed a wonderful body a strong mind. So, he became like his ideal that is why it is always said that keep a high ideal in front of you and you will become like that. Now in Yoga Vedanta you know this has been a common experience with all mystics that they feel themselves to be in others they feel this in a very deep way because awareness is not limited to my to the borders I have set it's not limited to my skin things are outside my skin but they are not outside my awareness so when you come alive to that awareness, when it becomes a fact and a reality for you, you perceive the other person as me in another form, the same awareness functioning to another body and mind, this is how you perceive it. So, they feel a deep sense of interconnectedness and unity with all of creation. You know this is an actual fact and experience in the life of mystics. Once let me tell you this incident. You know Vivekananda was in his monastery in Belur and he was in his room. In the room next to his was another brother disciple called Vignanananda and Vivekananda it so happened Vignanananda did got up around 2 o'clock that night and he came out into the portico he saw Vivekananda also pacing there and he asked Swamiji that why you did not sleep and Swamiji said I could not sleep I was sleeping well when I got a sudden shock and I woke up I am sure that something very devastating has happened somewhere and somehow my mind caught it and that time they did not understand it and Vignanji thought it's just maybe some dream or something that but next day the papers carried the news that there was a big volcanic eruption in Fiji and a whole lot of people had suffered and been killed and all sorts of problems and injuries and that had happened exactly at the time when Vivekananda had woken up in shock. So in some way the mind can relate with every other mind in a mystical way. You see from the brain standpoint it mirrors the actual experience of others. This is really the heart of the explanation to empathy. What does empathy mean? Putting yourself into the shoes of others. You are feeling the experience of the other person as if it was your experience. Unless empathy is there, you cannot actually go out and work for others you cannot feel for others the way a great person feels it is only due to empathy so that is based on mirror neurons the explanation for empathy is the mirror neuron mechanism of the human brain you are actually experiencing the pain or the whatever the hurt and so, you can stand up and work for it. Now, let us go to the next piece of information. You see the next point there here is memory salience. What remains salient in your memory? Can you tell me? What is it that in your memory? Can you tell me? What is it that you remember basically? Neurophysiology will tell you that it is emotional emotionally laden information which has the greatest memory salience in terms of both significance for you as well as retrieval emotionally laden information anything if there is the emotional aspect, if emotion is added to it you remember it very well. Now, these processes have been studied in a very big way because once upon a time we did discuss memory is not it. In one of the sessions we discuss memory in a deep way you have two types of memory long term short term and then you have declarative and non declarative memories. Declarative memories are what are consciously accessible like for example, episodic and semantic memories. Episodic memories are autobiographical in nature, snapshots of your personal past and semantic memories are facts about you and about others which may not be autobiographical even. So, these memories are consciously accessible and that is why they hold memory salience. In your mind these are the things which will dominate. Even if you have a whole lot of information in your mind, what are the things which will dominate? They are telling you something very important, please try to understand this point. What is it that is going to dominate your mental field? Memory salience is going to. What are the factors for memory salience? Emotions. Yes, emotions. So, these will always remain salient in your mind and especially the episodic and semantic memory systems, these 2 types of memory will always be salient. Now how does Yoga Vedanta see memory? As recycled conscious thought, we have discussed this earlier, you take in something becomes a vritti goes to the subconscious becomes sanskar comes out as memory. Now memory is not just most of your thought is memory, not just that memory is so very significant for you because it is in the form of remembrance of a past event it points to something very deep. If you in the present are able to remember a past event again there is a common factor between the two events. The common factor is you the awareness. This is there in the Brahma Sutras. The immutability of the cognizer of memory is fact that awareness underlies the entire thought process. So, if you think deeply and see this is indeed a fact. What more does it tell you about memory? It yoga gives you this very important equation that because your mental awareness is dominated by memory you do not feel it. So, in a way if you want to feel awareness through the process of yoga you must separate it from memory, you must extract it from the clutches of memory that is why stop thought. Try to practice it in some way so that you are able to access the foundation of the thinking process, try to find an insight into that. So, this is the normal process given. These are all the important points about memory which only the yogic sciences can point out to because they have invented techniques to take you there. They are not just giving you ideas, they are actually giving you techniques. How to get there? There is a process, do it this way. Today morning also we were discussing the techniques. So, memory salience is an important subject of study for both Vedanta and neuroscience. This is how they are studying it. Then we have this reward circuitry of the human brain which is another tremendous thing you know your brain is has evolved to minimize danger and maximize reward. There are circuits which are called actually called dopaminergic circuits which are based on the release of dopamine which is an important neurotransmitter. In fact, it is it is the physical correlate of the sense of pleasure that you feel. The feel good experience the physical correlate neurophysical correlate is called dopamine. Now there are these circuits which decide you know it is actually this neurotransmitter which decides your preferred courses of action, the choices you will make and the lessons you have learnt, the beliefs you hold to a to many people. You see the unexplored, uninvestigated mind will fall for all this. It will your choice of things will be decided by this dopaminergic circuit only. How much pleasure does it give me? That is its value. So, this is how the brain by itself will function. So, what Yoga Vedanta has to add to this is the conscious mind has this capacity to stop this circuitry, to create a value system where you are not given to follow this circuit. See I told you the difference between shreyas and prayers is not it, hm the good and the pleasurable, the preferable and the pleasurable. Many times when making a choice, this will be the essential choice you need to make. Now if you have not explored the inner dimensions of your being, you can always fall for what is immediately pleasurable with consequent reactions later on. But if you are trained in yoga immediately you will see it for what it is. So, this dopaminergic circuit does not have its hold over you. This reward circuitry Yoga Vedanta will say has to be broken for you to take make the right decisions hm otherwise you are only going by the reward and that is why in scriptures like the Bhagavad Gita they will tell you drop the the necessity, the intention, the feel for the reward itself. If you want to live a value based life and take the right make the right choices right decisions in your life build your life evolve your life you must stop expectation at this level one little thing giving me a bit of pleasure for a few seconds should I compromise my values over that thing this is where yoga Vedanta is invaluable. It will tell you never compromise values for emotions. You can break this entire circuitry and remain independent of it. This is the great thing about which we should understand about that is why non expectation Bhagavad Gita expresses it very openly karma neva adhikaraste ma phaleshu kadachana don't expect results from what actions you perform why otherwise you will fall into this circuitry and it's addictive it will only make you chase pleasure not what is good now this basic knowledge we are not giving our youngsters so after a lot of trial and error you come back to this understanding. But basically if you understand this you see neurochemistry, neurophysiology can only give you what is happening in your brain. Yoga Vedanta will give you as a result of what is happening in your brain, how is your mind functioning, how is your awareness getting blocked or getting revealed, how is it affecting your human experience. So, what you should do about it, this entire knowledge comes from this, a value system can be created out of this. We leave it to you to create your values, but essentially you must understand the mechanisms how they are functioning. There is a simple story which points out to this hm let me just tell you that story for a for 2 3 minutes. See there was a king who was absolutely frustrated in being a king because the responsibilities the entire owners of the kingdom the the sense of stress he used to feel was enormous, because he is responsible for almost everything, he was a very sincere person. And he said that because I am the king, any kind of injustice taking place also I will suffer, it will be my karma, it will be my doing in some way. And so, I do not want so many responsibilities at all, I do not want to be the king, but he was such an ideal king that nobody was prepared to allow him to go. So, one day what he did, he quietly called his guru and told him, see I give this entire kingdom to you, you please take care of all the affairs of this kingdom, I will go away maybe to the neighboring kingdom, take up some small job there and I will practice my yoga, vedanta, my dhyan and all this, my mind is in all this, I do not want to manage all this kingdom and all this. Then the guru told him, okay, then in that case, the guru understood his state of mind. So he said, see, will you do one work for me? You can do this. I will take the responsibility of your kingdom, but this one work I want you to do and the king said what is it? He said, I will put you in the form of a trustee of this kingdom. You will run this kingdom for me, not for yourself. You are no more king, I am the king, you are my trustee. You know trusteeship management is a very huge thing. Any company has no single owner, there will be a number of trustees and then shareholders right. So, they are not owners, they are running the show and the neither is the capital invested in any single person. So, also if you take charge of something and work as a trustee there, you know you will not get as stressed out as if you were in charge of the entire thing, you were the owner of the entire thing, it were the owner of the entire thing, it belong to you, no such thing. So, understanding that work can be performed in this way without expectation, without identity coming in there, without attributing things to yourself, this is the non expectation that Bhagavad Gita and all these scriptures speak of. When you function like that what happens is these circuitry in the in your mind the reward circuitry in your mind gets confused, it will not function in that way at all. It will function in the neural pathways which you create are those of non expectation of reward. As a result what will happen deep level detachment comes, you actually fashion your brain through your mind I told you is not it, you rewire you can rewire your neural pathways through your mind through your thoughts. So, if this basically we are able to digest that I do not function as the owner of something, I function in the form of a as a service you are doing it, then it will not affect you in wrong ways, you will not get stressed out by it. So, this is a possibility, non expectation is a very huge virtue in our culture. So, basically it is hitting on this circuit you are you understood this know. So, you see the contribution yoga vedant has to make to modern neuroscience. There is another one special bias which the human brain resorts to from time to time it is called the in group versus out group bias. Wherever there is a community of people working this kind of bias will be there. What does this bias say? You see managers have a neurological propensity to discount information about themselves from outsiders in favor of information from close associates. We do this all of us do this in our own way. Now, this bias is also based on a kind of circuit which your brain creates. It creates a circuitry out of the people you prefer the in group. This affects your decisions, this affects your very vision. So, again circuits like these have to be reoriented, rewired through thoughts. There should be no in group, out group as such. Knowledge is knowledge and if at all you are listening to a preferred group, it should be a group which is positive, is not it? There is no in group or group about it, a group which is positive. Anybody who is giving you positive advice or good emotions, good thoughts, that is the person whom you can relate to without getting into unnecessary biases like this. Like this there are many things which neuroscience has one particular outlook and Yoga Vedanta has an outlook which adds on to this. It can give you a total knowledge of the subject being studied. Now the the most important two skills of the brain which should be very high on actually the management development agenda are these last two skills which are mindfulness and self-awareness hm. This is this is the basic unique capacity of the human mind which makes us what we are. What is mindfulness? Awareness. Yes, you are aware of something, self conscious about it and you are doing a function through that self awareness. If you are not mindful of something, if your mind is not there, you may your senses may be there it does not matter. You are looking at something, but you are not seeing it because your mind is elsewhere. So, mindfulness today we have a huge tradition of practicing mindfulness, you know Vipassana techniques and all will give you so, so many techniques are there to help you become more and more mindful. If you become more and more mindful, essentially you are only augmenting awareness within you, so that you are able to distance yourself from thought processes, emotions all this hm. So, mindfulness is very important. In fact, your success is decided to a great extent by this, please know this hm. Even emotional intelligence requires a lot of mindfulness. Actually we have substantial medical and psychological investigation on this which tells you mindfulness is absolutely important. It is even important for physical health hm if you are not awake from within your very cells will become lazy, tamasic. So, to awaken them first of all the mind must be in a state of high level alertness, high level aliveness. If you are very alive now suppose just imagine and see if you are double as alive as you are just now, if you became double as alive, how would be your experience of life? Double as beautiful as it is. So, that is why it is important to develop mindfulness. Then you have self-awareness which is you see the essential processes of metacognition and all this, they are all possible because there is self-awareness in the human being. No, to pause about when you are thinking, to pause a bit and think about what you are thinking is a uniquely human capacity. It is only possible due to self-awareness. So, the more this awareness is enhanced, you actually you know you charge up your brain as it were. It will function in a wonderful way for you if the these basic things are well taken care of. What is the basic thing about the human mind? That fundamentally your thoughts are floating on awareness that has to be brought into the forefront, then only your psychological reality will not be prominent, the existential reality has come to the forefront. The essential you has come to the forefront, so the instrument of the mind can be handled very well. So, this is something which again and again the mind sciences especially in the eastern traditions will keep telling you that there are ways to do this even Buddhism recommends a whole lot of techniques to arrive at this any mystical tradition even in the West you know works like Philokalia the way of the pilgrim is a small book all these books will give you this very special technique called the mind in the heart. It is actually a yogic technique. If you keep your attention at the heart center, awareness in a way is continuous, awareness comes into full blossom. So, like this small small techniques which may appear mystical, mystical does not mean mysterious mystical means something beyond the normal which maybe you have not tried. So, it is appearing mystical, but if you try it, it becomes natural. So, it is something like that these techniques are like that they are all meant to augment your levels of awareness. So, that brain regulates its circuitry, brain functions as you would have it function and it affects the entire system hm. So, this is how you can augment the levels of human experience. Since we have already said at the heart of all human experience is consciousness, I would just like to tell you one basic thing about consciousness and we will end today's session. It is this fact that science and Vedanta are seeing consciousness differently at the present moment. There are certain fundamental differences. I have been giving you the Yoga Vedanta perspective again and again. How is science, mainstream science looking at consciousness? How is it studying consciousness? You can understand through this slide. See these are the four major differences. I am not going to go into detail about them, but just you should know it as part of your curriculum here. What are the major differences between science and Vedanta on consciousness? First of all science believes consciousness is an emergent property of the human brain hm, but Vedanta will tell you it is non-emergent. In fact, you are understanding the brain in your consciousness, through your consciousness. Then science will tell you there is the content of consciousness, it always means consciousness of something. Please understand this clearly so that confusion does not happen in the mind, hm. That consciousness has content, thoughts, emotions, all of this it is consciousness of your thought, consciousness of your emotion, this is how it is studying consciousness. That is why they call thought, will, emotion all of this as consciousness in western philosophy. But Vedanta is very very clear that consciousness is essentially contentless. If it is off something it is not yet pure consciousness. Mind activity is very far off from the state of pure consciousness. Even what you are calling in live and mind activity is only due to the reflection of this consciousness in the mind. It is the the reflected consciousness which is getting enmeshed with the thought activity in the mind and so, enlivening your thought, it is an appearance that is all. So, this is another basic difference, then science will tell you it it is blank it denotes a kind of blankness the this concept of the atman or pure self but vedanta will tell you it is poorna it is fullness in itself and the it is an object of study according to science that is why you have this whole science of consciousness. But Vedanta will tell you consciousness is the eternal subject because it is the eternal subject everything is objective to it including your consciousness studies. So, these are some fundamental differences in how at present the two disciplines of science and Vedanta are seeing consciousness which you should know. With this I think we will finish today's session because time is up. Next session you have asked about Gayatri Mantra so we will take that up because next session is actually on the methodology methods. It will be on Friday Friday same time and we will take the Gayatri Mantra as one method to come to this understanding of Vedanta. Thank you. you
 Music Om Sahana Vavatu Sahana Om Bhunatu Sahaveeryam Karavavahai Tejasvinavaditamastumavitvishavahai Asatoma Sadgamaya Tamasoma Jyotirgamaya Mrityorma Amritam Gamaya Om Shanti Shanti Shanti He Today we are going to research, going to the research methodologies for what we have been studying What are the types of research methodologies available? The broad classifications and what exactly do we use to study the self consciousness, what is science using and what is Vedanta and Yoga using, this is what we will go into. And then you have asked for Gayatri Mantra, so we will be discussing that in detail. So, that is the syllabus for today. And regarding this research methodologies, there are two broad classifications which you should know. One is what is called qualitative research, one is quantitative research. For centuries together, qualitative research which is mainly the first person research was considered the main method of research. And it was seen that the observation of the person who is experiencing something that is primary in qualitative research always that is considered to be primary, the observation of the experiencer is primary. And later on other kinds of methodologies were developed. So, we will be discussing both of them, I will be showing it to you on slides what these two methods are about. Now, suppose let me just introduce first person and third person perspective to you, because sometimes students are not able to understand this. What do we mean by first person perspective? You say you know something in first person when it is an experience to you, how does something feel to you, that is the first person perspective. Third person perspective means it is being taken by an instrument and coming to you as third person data, it is not in the first person. So, like for example, say if you say I am hungry and I say well what is the proof that you are hungry, let me take a ultrasound scan of your stomach or a CT scan and if I trust only the CT scan report, then that is the third person perspective you can say to a subjective experience like hunger. And if I take your own version of it, your own verdict that is the first person perspective. Now see during subjective experience usually we use the first person perspective, there is a whole philosophical method for that called phenomenology which also we will be going into, but usually what is happening is first person and third person data are being combined in any study, even if it is the study of a purely subjective phenomenon like consciousness. This is how science is also studying it, because science usually recommends a third person perspective, third person neural data for something for anything that you are studying for your object of study. And if the object is consciousness itself, you can combine the third person data and the first person data, first person analysis and that method is what is called neurophenomenology, where you combine the first person perspective along with third person neural data and an interesting correspondence has been found. That is why you know people of meditation are being taken into neuroscience in the research experiments of neuroscience, because a very steady mind can be able to give you a perfect first person perspective and fMRI scans give you the third person perspective and you can combine the two and there is a correspondence which they have found. So, these are broadly speaking the methods being employed. Let me show it to you on a slide, the main first qualitative and quantitative methods what they rely upon. Look at this slide, see qualitative method and quantitative method of research. Conceptually speaking, qualitative method is concerned with understanding human behavior from the informant's perspective and assumes a dynamic and negotiated reality. Quantitative method is, the very concept is is it is concerned with discovering facts about social phenomena. See it is it may not be a purely subjective research and it assumes a fixed and measurable reality. Methodologically qualitative research the data are collected through participant observation and interviews, data are analyzed by themes from descriptions by informants and data are reported in the language of the informant. While the methodology of quantitative research holds data to be collected through measuring things, quantification, is not it, science is entirely based on this. And then the data is analyzed through numerical comparisons and statistical inferences and data are reported through statistical analysis survey based essentially. A few more points about the two forms of research, look at this slide see quantitative research and qualitative research we are comparing now. Where are the roots of quantitative research? They are in Cartesianism and positivism and the roots of qualitative research are in pragesianism and positivism and the roots of qualitative research are in pragmatism and hermeneutics. Hermeneutics is the interpretation of scriptural texts. Then the goal of investigation quantitative research is prediction, confirmation, hypothesis, testing. In qualitative research it is it is understanding, description, discovery, meaning and hypothesis generation. Design wise quantitative research is predetermined and structured, while qualitative research is flexible, evolving and emergent, it can keep changing. Sample wise quantitative research requires large random representative samples, while qualitative research requires small non-random purposeful samples. Data collection for quantitative research is through inanimate instruments like statistical data surveys, questionnaires. Data collection for qualitative research is primary through the researcher, he is the primary instrument, semi- semi directive interviews, observations and documents. Mode of analysis for quantitative research is deductive and inductive by statistical method. Mode of analysis is abductive, see this is an important word for you to know that is through the researcher, through the medium of the experiencer of the phenomenon, through him the qualitative research takes place that is the mode of analysis. And the findings in quantitative research are precise and numerical, while the findings in qualitative research are comprehensive, holistic, expansive and richly descriptive. Certain unique attributes of qualitative research further are look at that first thing importance of context, importance of meaning and participant researcher relationship as also researcher as instrument. These are the most important characteristics attributes of qualitative research. Now when you study a phenomenon like consciousness, what type of research I told you today they are combining the two forms of research, but naturally from your own side what type of research will you perform this again depends on what kind of training a person has received. See there are three areas where science and Vedanta meet and shake hands. The three areas are causality and understanding of causality, second is an understanding of consciousness and an understanding of the interconnectedness of life. In today's session we are going to only study consciousness, how the qualitative and quantitative methods together work for the study of consciousness. Because this is our main topic of interest, this entire course is meant for discovery of consciousness. So, we will study only this phenomenon and how the two methods are being applied. See basically when you take a third person approach what happens? A third person approach has been taken since the last number of decades and there they have found very clearly in this third person research that when you take a third person survey of something like consciousness which is a phenomenon which is purely subjective. You are trying to find in third person research neural correlates for that phenomenon, you are trying to find out neuro physiological correlates. If you are not able to find it out then your science is not complete. So, this is actually called the hard problem of consciousness studies. It is a term which was coined by Shalmers in from New York University. What he essentially is trying to say is you see for anything like for example, say a feeling of pain. If you can find a neural correlate, if you know which portion of your brain the neurons from which portion of your brain are firing you can give a kind of explanation to that phenomenon of pain, to that experience of pain. Suppose I cannot find a correlate, I do not know how to explain it through the mind, I do not know how to explain it through neurophysiology, so it becomes a hard problem. So, consciousness faces this tremendous hard problem problem because it has no functional correlate. In fact, it has no relational structural functional property as such and that is why it has it has become difficult to track it to study it although different methods have been tried like from the third person perspective again they havecoined a term called qualia which are supposed to be qualitative representative properties of an experience. See how do I see a yellow flower as yellow and a red flower as red. So, maybe there are substances called qualia which are responsible for this difference, they are essential properties of an experience only. So, all this was posited, but then scientist did not find qualia something like that as such. So, these are all theories which were brought up in order to explain the phenomenon of experience, the phenomenon of consciousness. Another theory which has recently come up I think it was in the neuroscience news sometime back from neuroscience.com, it was sent to me by a scientist that they have found a neural correlate for conscious experience and it is actually it is called the L5P neurons. These are neurons responsible for the generation of conscious experience and that is why you can say in a way the experience can be anatomically studied and there is a third person correlate to the experience. They say that this these neurons actually provide the connection between consciousness and its contents which are thoughts. So, these neurons are seen to fire wherever there is a conscious experience. So, today it has the most recent research has been on this. See this is a picture of those neurons functioning actually. So, this is the current finding that these neurons are responsible for conscious experience, but it is still an ongoing research, we are trying to further find out how these this the entire activity can be tracked. So, this kind of research is continuously going on. Now, from the standpoint of scientists, why they are so acutely studying this phenomenon of consciousnesses? You see when you have a conscious experience to the very last detail you become aware of everything. Like for example, you saw one leaf you can distinguish it from its neighboring leaf by so many factors is not it, you can distinguish about 1000 shades of green in your conscious experience. So, that is why David Shalmer used a very powerful metaphor once. He said how is it that the richly painted canvas of human experience is produced from a such a small pellet of paints which is the visible light portion of your electromagnetic radiation. How is it that it can give us so many shades of green, so many shades of blue, this riot of colors which you experience as life. So, essentially what is the explanation to conscious experience, how will you explain it, that is the essential question of this consciousness studies. And in different ways they are trying to study it, you see from the Vedantic standpoint, basically Vedanta will put the question that you do not experience and a phenomenon like consciousness ever in the third person that is why you may not be able to find a third person correlate for example joy happiness do you experience it as dopamine or adrenaline tell me unless we told you dopamine is responsible for your feelings of pleasure you would not even know in your experience you have not yet felt dopamine but how do you feel joy how do you feel happiness you feel it as a burst of energy within you a lightness a buoyancy in your heart so it is a feeling first. So from the first person perspective how do you feel an experience, you have the experience as a feeling in your entire system hm. Later on there is a neuro physiological correlate which has been found which is told to you. So, even pain any experience is felt as a feeling first and this is what they are trying to say that is why first person observation of and this is what they are trying to say that is why first person observation of this feeling is the most important explanation to the experience. This is what philosophies like you Vedanta are trying to tell you. Consciousness studies has explored try to explore all these questions about conscious experience. See they are similar to Vedantic questions, the aim of both is the same. See how relevant these questions are, how does the brain create conscious experience, what does complete oblivion mean, how does perception become first person experience, how independent is our awareness from body mind complex and then the heart problem which I just now told you, hm, finding a neurophysiological correlate for conscious experience, that is the heart problem. And where do yoga and Vedanta contribute in this? You see yoga also, I mean Vedanta also ask similar questions. What is consciousness? How do we experience it? Can subjective experience, this is again a question which pops up in consciousness studies, can subjective experience be explained in objective terms, can it be explained in physical terms. Then they are commonly asking the question what are the appropriate methods to be used in order to do this, see how relevant the questions are, see if the question strikes you, you will try to find an answer for it by yourself. If the question is like a theory to somebody's question, then the answer also will not hit me, it will not come to me, even if it is told to me. So, understand the weight, the gravity of these questions. They must be the natural questions of a thinking mind, how am I thinking? Why is it that in awareness everything is happening? Only if I am aware, anything matters to me. So, what is this awareness about? This is these are natural questions which should come to a mind which is originally intellectual not borrowed intelligence from books. So you see these kind of questions you will find both in consciousness studies and in Vedanta what are the neural correlates of consciousness, can new methods be found to to study consciousness, what are the properties of a conscious experience like for example, emotion thought are these are properties of a conscious experience? Like for example, emotion, thought are these are properties of a conscious experience or no consciousness is apart from all this. Can we develop rigorous methods of investigating and formalizing data about conscious experience from the first person perspective? This also consciousness studies is asking today. What would be the implications of this science of consciousness to society and can the study of consciousness be complemented by the contemplative traditions of this world. The great contemplative traditions of both the east and west can they contribute to this understanding of consciousness this is what they are trying to explore in consciousness studies and Vedanta also asks very similar questions. So, how they are studying and how Vedanta is studying you must have a general idea of it because your entire course is concentrating on self discovery and management. Some idea you must have how they are trying to study. I already introduced to you the phenomenological method of Vedanta. What does it mean? See, basically the primary departure from Western philosophy about consciousness in Vedanta is it is neither structural nor relational nor you can say representational which means intentional it stands by itself in its light the mind functions this is what Vedanta holds the the fact that you are thinking you are having conscious experiences points to the fact of consciousness being there and it is independent of the mind in fact Tasyabhasa Sarvamidam Vibhati the Upanishads say which means it is independent of the mind. In fact, tasya bhaasa sarva midam vibhati the Upanishads say which means it is due to the fact of consciousness that the mind is becoming conscious, the body is getting enlivened, you are having conscious experiences in the outer world. Now you are asking for the an explanation of that conscious experience without referring to consciousness standing behind the mind how will you find it. So, the phenomenological method primarily it is an inductive qualitative open ended research method which is concerned with the experience with the study of experience from the standpoint of the experiencer. How does something feel to me bracketing out all other assumptions, presumptions, all other methods, primarily how does something feel to me, that data is most important for phenomenological experience, phenomenological study and this is one of the primary methods of philosophy being used for subjective phenomena like consciousness. So, when you have this this kind of an approach you know epistemologically speaking this relies entirely on personal knowledge and subjectivity is not it. If I have to ask how an experience feels to me I must have an understanding of how I am functioning and a deeply subjective understanding. So, it relies on both of this and it relies on entirely on personal perspective and interpretation. Finally I can tell best what is happening in my system and how this system is functioning. So, entire yoga if you see it is subscribing this, this kind of a method. How is it that I function? How is it that I know? We studied mind and perception, basically what is it trying to see? How is it that I perceive? Before I jump and say this is one particular thing, I must know all the factors responsible for that perception for me to to authenticize that experience to make it authentic. Otherwise, I might have added something to it, I might have removed something for it, I told you if your attention is flitting you cannot grasp anything. So, the whole point comes to this that phenomenologicalapproach becomes very important in studying subjective phenomena. Now I am going to try this phenomenological approach right here on you. We will try a few thought experiments in order to understand this method. Another understanding of phenomena before we go into the thought experiment is that how things are appearing to your consciousness. See I will I will just give you one small understanding here, think about it clearly and see. Whenever you see an object, you are seeing that object as it is appearing to your five senses. Now, suppose I am seeing this pen, this appears like a blue pen to me. To my senses which are able to track especially this eye which is able to track the visible light range, this is appearing as blue. You know to some other creatures if they were introduced here, this would appear as something totally different depending on their faculties of perception. To me also suppose I had UV light capacity to ah sensitivity towards UV light this would appear something very different. If I had capacity to ah catch ah infrared radiation or radio waves the whole world would appear something totally different. So, my perception is limited by my senses and whatever I am equipped to perceive that much only I can perceive. This table appears like a table to me, you know to an ant moving there this will appear like a mountain, is not it? To a bird flying that this is a speck, to a mite or a wasp this may be just a pixelated something not a table, to a cockroach it is something else with its compound eyes it is some it perceives something totally different, to our five senses this is a table. So, what is this actually? This much you should be able to draw from this that my perception is limited by my equipment and I am equipped to perceive in a certain particular way. First thing about perception, second thing is always the perception occurs in my awareness because I am aware I perceive things like I am perceiving this table here. So, perception cannot be removed from awareness it is not apart from awareness due to these two factors that my apparatus is required for perception and perception is dependent on my awareness you know the standpoint of Vedanta is, that is why this has no intrinsic existence as a table in itself. It is dependent on these two factors to be perceived as a table. At first glance, this may be a little hard for you to digest, but think about it and it will become very clear. You must only give it more thought. Nothing has intrinsic existence except consciousness because that does not require anything to validate its existence. Everything else requires awareness to become perceptible as that thing and it is of course, limited by your senses to be perceived as that thing. So, due to this simple fact they say that intrinsic existence, essential existence or absolute existence belongs only to the Atman, only to consciousness everything else functions on borrowed awareness, borrowed existence. So, this is a huge theory in Vedanta which explains why the world is considered unreal. Unreal in the sense like this, dependent on something for its existence. The term Mithya does not mean it does not exist. It appears as this in your consciousness. Not that it is not there we always you know mithya has been a very corrupt word it has been used very in a very wrong way for many centuries actually mithya essentially means as that thing it has holds only dependent existence this is the meaning it is a very technical term that is why it should not be used glibly. So, by using it glibly we made a mess of many things actually, but now we should understand since you are well trained in science you must catch these subtle points, what are they trying to mean by saying something is unreal. Not that it does not exist, it is an appearance to your consciousness as that particular thing this is all they are trying to tell you. It is an appearance just like how you can say electro color is an appearance of electromagnetic radiation, is not it? It does not exist apart from electromagnetic radiation, does it? There is nothing called color as such, it is nothing, but electromagnetic radiation which is perceived as color by your equipment. So also is everything else. Essentially consciousness being perceived as that particular thing in your perception through your senses. So that is how they are trying to understand. That is why in Vedanta you will find sentences like subject and object both appear in consciousness everything is an appearance in consciousness this is what they are trying to mean if you have caught the essential point what intrinsic existence means and how it belongs to consciousness alone everything else has extrinsic existence dependent existence you will understand what they are trying to say through all these sentences. Now the thought experiment which I told you right here we are going to perform sit straight all of you because to understand this very clearly you need full attention. See I will put a few questions answer me and try to solve the thing by yourself. Tell me when you sit still and think deeply, if I put this question to you, is my sensation limited by the boundaries of my skin, is it true? Your sensation is limited by the boundary of your skin, your perception is not in limited by the boundary of your skin, right. Now what is within this skin is the body, what is outside the skin? It appears to be outside your skin, but it is never outside your awareness, is not it? You can be aware of a whole lot of things altogether, which means what? What does this mean? You are not limited or contained within the skin. You are using it as an instrument, functioning through it, in your awareness you are capable of grasping everything. Just now your mind can be in London, you may be perceiving a whole lot of things in your head, you are not limited by the boundaries of your body nor are you contained within it, you are functioning through it nor are things different from you in the sense anything is outside my skin, but not outside my awareness. So, you see a basic this is what is called phenomenological thinking from my standpoint from my experience my thinking itself I understood how I am functioning this is not a theory it is just an observation of a naturally occurring phenomenon which is happening with you all the time isn't this true what we discussed just now. Now let me put to you another question are we a body with awareness in it or is the body in our awareness? Are we a body with awareness in it or is the body in our awareness? How do you feel it at any given moment of time? You always feel it as the body is in your awareness. You are fundamentally aware in that awareness you are thinking so you are positing a body if you say awareness is in my body and I asked you where point it out to me you can't point out in your own experience you are fundamentally self-aware so there is the thinking process in that you posit entities and identify with them please see this it is in your own experience that is why body consciousness thought emotion everything arises in my awareness, awareness only can be fundamentally me, I means awareness in that all this is happening, all my thinking, my science, my philosophy everything is happening in my awareness, that is why I become aware of the body, the body does not become aware of me, is not it, I become aware of my thoughts, my thoughts do not become aware of me. Is not it? So, awareness is the fundamental fact about you. Because you are self-aware, everything else follows, human experience follows. So, you see, this is the phenomenological method, how you are seeing it from your standpoint, how is anything feeling to you. Now one more thought experiment, do my thoughts feel like they are mine or they are me? Mine, why? mind. Why? Because I know I can see that thought mentally you can actually see what you have been thinking. I told you memory metacognition all these are proofs that there is an underlying awareness which is common to both the streams of thought that which you thought earlier and that which you remembered later, that which you thought earlier and which you metacognized later. There is something fundamentally common between the two for you to catch that experience in memory or metacognition. So, remember this the very fact that my thoughts feel like they are mine and not me means I am the observer of that thought. I am fundamentally the awareness in which thought is appearing, so also with your body. You are it is it is yours, it is not you. Again it is an instrument given for you to function through. the our fundamental mistake in understanding things is we think this is me once you declare this is me your thought will stop there it will not go further you tend to identify even with objects not just with body. So, this because there is no investigation that is why self enquiry this existential enquiry is at the heart of Vedant. It is at the heart of understanding the reality about something. If you go and identify first and foremost your thinking will stop there, you get involved in that identification from that you will get identified with objects all around you. So, that stops all level of investigation and enquiry, that is why alertness is the first thing required for this kind of research, you know you must be alert and alive to the depths of your being. And then you enquire properly, the enquiry itself will lead you within, it will lead you to the source of your mind, source of your thinking process. So, this is how existential enquiry is what we call Vedanta vichar which is today's philosophically speaking what is called phenomenology, phenomenological method of enquiry. So, this is the first person method which is usually followed in yoga and Vedanta. Let me ask you one more question, since we are doing it let us do it properly. See there is you have experiences where you are referring to yourself totally apart from your body. I had told you about the dream experience in one of the classes. You can be identified with some other personality in your dream and you are so identified with that personality, you have the body of that personality and your eye sense is continuing to be the same because you are saying I am identified with that particular personality. So, you can refer to yourself as a continuum a continuity without special reference to one particular body. What does this mean? Your eye sense is always apart from the body when it is identified with another body you became the superstar cricket superstar in your dream you identified with another body but the eye sense is the same which means you have this capacity to refer to yourself quite apart from the physical body this is such a magical thing just think about it and see. Your I that is why Vedanta tells you there is nothing which is these two are not co-existent the body and your I sense. They are two separately functioning entities. The I is functioning through the body mind complex, you mistook the body and the mind to be I, this is your problem. Because of non investigation, non enquiry in your own experience all the time the I is completely apart from the body, the two do not coexist. So, I am the body idea has no basis in truth, but you see this is a phenomenon so widespread. Everybody is only identified with the body it appears to be so, but a little investigation in a very calm sattvic state of mind will take you naturally into this. Always your eye sense sees the body as an object the mind as an object, the mind as an object. It is always objective to your experience, you the experience are always the the awareness that is becoming conscious of the body and mind that is seeing it objectively. In your own experience this is all the time happening, you did not investigate it that is the only problem. So, like this phenomenological enquiry goes like this you see is not this interesting hm how do you get the feel of an experience another phenomenological question what gives you the feel of a cake, the color of a bright flower it simply hits you as a very conscious experience. What is responsible for that experience? Somewhere because you are you are a self-aware, you are experiencing that thing. Video cameras all this gadgets around you can catch the a memory a picture of that thing, but cannot experience it because they are not self aware. Awareness is the is at the heart of experience. Just through phenomenological inquiry you can find out the profundity of the human conscious experience comes from the fact of awareness. So, this is how this particular qualitative approach method of inquiry goes. Now, I will just go into a method to take you into all of this, to give you an understanding of Vedanta, Yoga, you know, most people are asking for techniques, naturally, what is the technique, a method to go into it. If you just do this phenomenological enquiry, you come to the conclusions of Vedanta, Advaita Vedanta especially, because you will gradually see that subject and object are not two different things, subject is subject only with respect to object, both are appearances in your consciousness, this is not another theory they are building up, this is the natural fact about this world of manifestation, which is seen when you are able to do this level of enquiry, then it becomes available to your perception otherwise it is a closed thing but is there a technique to generate this level of knowledge. Now there are plenty of techniques one powerful technique is what you asked for the Gayatri mantra chanting. Gayatri mantra comes in both the Rig Veda and the Yajur Veda. And today now I am going to dwell only on this because many of you have asked for it and since you want to know everything about it and how to chant it we will do something of that for the next half an hour, but you must grasp everything that is being said because this is the most powerful mantra available to us to bring us to this level of experience to awaken us to reality you know it is actually like a lighted torch which will open up the doors of wisdom for you Gayathri is the most powerful mantra what is a mantra? Mantra means manana trrayate iti mantra when you think about it repeatedly it will liberate the mind that is a mantra and Gayatri means gayantam trayate iti gayatri one who chants it it liberates him that is Gayatri it is the most powerful mantra which which is also a prayer it is a prayer comma mantra to open your dhi the higher faculty of the human intellect which opens you to the heart of reality it is called the spiritual heart it opens the spiritual heart so that you perceive reality as it is I had told you about faculty development it is one of the ways of perceiving these higher subjective realities what we have been discussing consciousness and all that one of the potent ways to do that is to awaken the Dhi this is a faculty of the human intellect which simply brings the truth into your heart it floods you with the light of supreme truth so the Gayathri is a mantra to do this it is a prayer for this faculty how do you use the Gayathri see first of all let me give you some basic information about Gayathri, Gayathri is usually given during our Upanayan ceremonies isn't it for? For brahmacharis, for householders, it is a very important mantra because it will develop this higher intelligence in you. And Gayathri is personified as a Devi and she is called Gayathri Devi, you must have seen the picture, a five faced goddess, she is called Vedamata, she is the mother of all knowledge, from he comes all knowledge and the right perspective to everything hm. So, it all depends on the development of this faculty of dhe. Please remember this Gayatri has enormous benefits and blessings. Even if you do a little of it you will understand its power. It will not just awaken the higher intellect, it will open all your faculties of intuition. In the Vedas, it is five faculties of higher intelligence are mentioned. They are like this Dhi, which is your spiritual heart, then you have Medha, which is a very bright higher intellect, then you have Pragnya which is higher awareness, Dhriti higher will and Smriti great memory. Gayatri awakens all these five, these are five powerful faculties of your intelligence which gives you transcendental brings into your heart transcendental knowledge Gayathri awakens all of these it gives great inner stability to your mind deep inner calmness just the chanting of Gayathri and it will remove obstacles from your path it will remove dangers from your path that is the power of Gayathri it also gives you very strong memory you see the last thing which we discussed concentration memory all these capacities of the human mind are awakened and enhanced by the chanting of Gayathri so it is a very powerful mantra. I will first give you the story behind this mantra and then go into the mantra. There is a big story behind how the Gayathri was given out. You know how these mantras are come out of the mouths of sages? Do they think about it and invent them they are mystic syllables which are discovered in very high states of Samadhi and meditation. They are mystic syllables which lead into which give you a direct insight into reality lead you into reality as it were. So, it is not a matter of it is not a thought construction sort of thing they are the outpourings of enlightened sages and this mantra Gayathri mantra was given to us by Vishwamitra Rishi the person who gave out the Gayathri is Vishwamitra the presiding deity of the Gayathri mantra is the sun Savitra sun was the symbol of Brahman in the Vedic age, the supreme reality and the meter used in Gayatri chanting also is called Gayatri. Now this Vishwamitra Rishi, initially he was a king, he was a very great king, a very powerful king who had conquered a lot of kingdoms, it so happened that one day he was along with his entourage along with his army he was passing through a forest when he came across the hermitage of Vasishta Muni. Vasishta was a great Brahma Rishi of olden times you must have heard of the names so Vasishta's hermitage he came across and he got down to pay his respects to the Brahma Rishi. So, you see this was our culture always the greatest administrators would come and ask for spiritual knowledge, would bow down to spiritual knowledge because they understood its value, they understood its value to human society. So, Vishwamitra entered the hermitage and his army also entered all his troops and he came in front of Vashishta bowed down to him and asked for his blessings and Vashishta asked him that everything is well in your kingdom and he said yes by your blessings everything is well please bless me with more power and wealth and all this and then Vashishta said please rest here for some time your men are also tired and I will offer you some food refresh yourself and then you can proceed. Now Vishwamitra refused initially because he thought how will they provide us food there are thousands of men and why should we simply disturb the hermitage. So he said no it is okay we will go back to our kingdom and have our food but Vashishta insisted so Vishwamitra stayed back., but Vashishta insisted. So Vishwamitra stayed back. What did Vashishta do? He got up from his seat, he went inside and he had a cow, a divine cow, Kamadhenu you have heard, giver of all boons. So he whispered something in her ear. He whispered something into her ear and it seems this divine cow, she was a goddess in the form of a cow. Whatever she was asked for, she could give. So, he asked for food for the entire army and very quickly huge vessels of all sorts of delicacies and rich food was presented in one corner of the ashram and Vashishta went and invited the Vishwamitra and all his disciples, not disciples, his soldiers to come and have the food. All of them relished the food and it was divine like nectar and then Vishwamitra was so surprised he asked Vashishta, how did you get all this in this forest and then he said see I have a mother I worship her as mother and she is the one who provides us everything that we require and she is a Devi so then Vishwamitra you see greed came into him and the ego was already there he thought this cow should belong to me because I am the king everything in the in my kingdom belongs to the king so he told Vashishtha give me the cow I will give you any price you want for it Vashishtha said do not make this mistake she cannot be sold she is a goddess she is a Devi and she is the giver of all boons I will never part with this cow because she will she wants to stay only close to a place where there is this ambience where there is Brahma Vidya being practiced where there is Brahma Jnan she will not go into your palace but Vishwamitra was furious now, he said, what do you mean? I must have that cow. And he told his men, go and forcefully bring her. At once the cow ran behind Vashishta and Vashishta said, do not make this mistake I told you. Once more I tell you, she is a divine being. Do not make your soldiers touch her. Otherwise you will pay for it. And Vishwamitra said, I do not believe in in all this I'm going to take the cow and go and then Vashishtha just raised his Brahma Danda you must have heard of the story and the entire army was destroyed all of the men fell down on the ground and Vishwamitra was simply stunned what happened it was the power of the realization of Vasishta which is that Brahma Danda which he would hold he would just hold that wood on which he would do his spiritual his japa and the entire army was simply destroyed. So he said that there is some great power in this in this particular thing then he tried to attack Vasishta again just by raising the Brahma Danda he became powerless without any strength. Then he said Dik balam kshatriya balam brahma balam eva balam which means all this this prowess and strength which I had the ego which I had in being so strong and courageous with such a huge army such a huge kingdom it means nothing compared to this strength which this sage has. This is the real strength a knower of Brahman is so supremely strong just by his mind by his will he can control a a whole army So, then he said, well, I will acquire this kind of strength and then I will come and show you And he turned back He went back to his kingdom He gave his kingdom to his sons to manage And he went into the forest to do austerities And it seems for a long time If you go to the Puranas, they will even say thousands of years Because, you know, say thousands of years, because you know that sense of time is different, you know how they sense time, time is in you. So for a long time he performed austerities and then after that he came to this understanding, slowly his mind was changing, but still he had not overcome the tendencies of his mind the tendency towards arrogance, ego, pride this was still not completely gone so at this point of time comes the story of Trishanku have you heard that story you know there was a king who wanted to go to heaven with his body and he went and his name was Trishanku he went and requested Vashishta please help me Vashishta said please pass on I do not do such stupid things and he was angry he went to his sons Vashishta sons and said your father cannot send me you please send me so he was cursed by his sons and he became a very ugly person and then he comes to Vishwamitra who was doing his austerities and he says you see Vashishta has refused to send me can you do it now you see an enemy's enemy becomes your friend so this he became automatically became Vishwamitra's friend and Vishwamitra said what Vashishta refused then I will do it for you I am there do not worry I have performed so much austerity with the power of this austerity I will send you to the heavens and he did all sorts of his rituals and all that and Trishanku started rising to heaven in that very body. But this is against the law of cosmic existence, isn't it? Only after death one can go wherever according to his karma, wherever he has to go. And he cannot go to heaven like this. So at once Indra came into the sky and said, you can't do this, please stop it. And Vishwamitra said, what do you mean? I have done so much tapas, he will go up. And so Trishanku hung in the middle. They would not allow him into heaven and he could not come down on earth. So, it seems Vishwamitra with his powers created a heaven for him right there and like this in a state in which he was upside down, you know, he hung there and even now they say Trishanku heaven, when somebody is undeciding about something they say Trishanku state. So, this was Vishwamitra's power. After this episode was over Vishwamitra suddenly realized that he had spent all his power spiritual power in doing all this for that Trishanku just because he hated Vasishta and he helped him he understood the level of his pride and his ego it is all you see Vishwamitra's life shows you how important it is to get rid of all this to control your mind to actually reach the knowledge of Brahman is no joke. So when he understood all this further he went into austerities he said all my spiritual power got exhausted by doing all this I will perform more austerities he went deep into the forest again he sat down again hundreds of years passed by. This time another big obstacle came before him in the form of an Apsara called Menaka you might have heard of that story also so she seduced him and then he again he went out of his austerities and for a long time he was not in touch with this deep goal which he had fixed for himself that of becoming a Brahma Rishi getting the knowledge of Brahman becoming equal to Vasishta he forgot about that after a long time he came to his senses and then Menaka also left him and he came to this understanding that how am I wasting my powers, how I am wasting my time, lust, anger, ego, hatred, this feeling of malice towards somebody, jealousies all this can actually ruin you completely, it will stop your progress towards your fixed goals, this is what Vishwamitra's life shows. actually ruin you completely it it will stop your progress towards your fixed goals this is what Vishwamitra's life shows it also shows that through through the triumph of his will and his understanding he overcame all this he again plunged into great austerities and this time he got a certain level of illumination after a long time of austerity he got the vision of Lord Brahma who came to him and asked him blessed him with the title of Maharishi. Then Vishwamitra said but do not I deserve the title of a Brahma Rishi? Then Brahmaji said no for that you need the blessings of a Brahma Rishi. So go to Vasishta take his blessing if you have really removed all these negativities from your mind, if you have conquered them, not just removed temporarily, please see this, what tapasya means, you must have a knowledge, for self-knowledge tapasya is required, tapasya means purging your mind of all impurity, completely cleansing it, not simply emptying it temporarily, becoming absolutely pure in every way, then only this knowledge is possible. So he said, go and take the blessings of Vashishta and Vishwamitra came to Vashishta. When he came near the hermitage, he heard the conversation between Vishwamitra and Arundhati, Vishwamitra, sorry, between Vasishta and Arundhati. Vishwamitra has come to the hermitage of Vasishta. So Vasishta is telling Arundhati, you know, I have been following the spiritual progress of Vishwamitra and I am supporting him silently that he attains this illumination. He is a good man, his very name indicates Vishwasya Mitra is Vishwamitra he is the friend of all but this arrogance had come into him I hope he will be able to overcome it I am helping him in his spiritual progress as soon as he heard this Vishwamitra was so ashamed with whom, that's why he is a Brahma Rishi he is beyond all this duality all this stupidity and so he came and fell down at Vashishtha's feet please forgive me for what I have done as soon as his head touched the feet of the sage a spiritual current passed through him and spontaneously in his heart arose the Brahma Gayatri Om Bhur Bhuvah Svaha Tatsavitur Varenyam Bhargo Devasya Dheemahi Dheeyo Yona Prachodayat spontaneously it is rising within him it inundated him and he merged into Samadhi when he came out of that state he found Vashishta blessing him and this Gayatri emanating from within his heart continuously when he went back then Vashishta told him now you have become a Brahma Rishi you have attained the knowledge of the supreme by overcoming all weaknesses at all levels and then when he returned back he gave this Gayathri to everyone that is why he is the Rishi who gave the world the Gayathri so that this is a means you see what is the Siddhi for the Siddha becomes a means for those who are trying to become Siddhas. So the Gayathri that is how it comes to us it encapsulates the essence of Vedic wisdom because it is a prayer for Dhi. If you have understood the value of this higher level intelligence what is called the spiritual heart the awakening of this then you you get entitled to receive that knowledge. If you do not understand its value the value of this level of spirituality how will the knowledge ever come to you so this is the Gayatri Mantra let us just discuss the meaning then we will repeat it Om Bhur Bhuvah Swaha, Om is the symbol of Brahman the sound symbol of Brahman Bhuvah Swaha are the three planes of existence which Bhuv means actually this earth, bhuv is the world of mains, pitrlok jo kehte hai, sva is swargalok, the heavens. Now all these worlds, there are slight different interpretations also which you will get of these three words bhuv, bhuv, sva, like for, bhuv is considered the embodiment of vitality, bhuvah is the destroyer of suffering, svah is the giver of happiness like this slightly different interpretations also you will find. Typically in our shastras bhuvah svaha are these three worlds of this earth, the world of mains, pitrlok and the world of the gods. Now all these three are illumined by what light? That Savitur Varenyam, by the light of the sun. Who is Varenyam? Who is the most, the best, the choicest, the most adorable one? He is illumining all these three worlds. Bright, the bright sun. Bhargo, the destroyer of all sins. Devasya, that divine one. You see dev, that dhatu for dev is div, which is divinity, shining, the shining one. Dhimahi, may he imbibe my intellect, Dhiyo this intellect which is ours Yonaha Prachodayat may he illumine that intellect and imbibe may my intellect become capable of imbibing this supreme knowledge in this way may he illumine my intellect so that I may get this Brahma Jnan, Brahma Vidya so that I may experience the knowledge of the supreme reality may he so inspire my intellect the sun, the most adorable one, the divine being who illumines the three worlds may he so illumine my intellect that I will get the knowledge of the supreme this is the prayer words may he so illumine my intellect that I will get the knowledge of the supreme this is the prayer of Gayatri so let clear confidently you must repeat it see I have put it here please see this every syllable should be very clear when you repeat it you can't mix up words and repeat it anyhow It's a very powerful mantra Om Bhur Bhuvah Swaha Once more repeat it after me Om Bhur Bhuvah Swaha Tatsavitur Varenyam Tatsavitur Varenyam Bhargo Devasya Dheemahi Bhargo Devasya Dheemahi Dheeyo Yonah Prachodayat Dheeyo Yonah Prachodayat Dheiyo yonah prachodayat Now how do you chant Gayatri? Usually it is prescribed that you must chant it in the Sandhya period which means at dawn and at dusk. These are very special times when nature is very quiet. Naturally the Gayathri will fructify, blossom within yourself if you practice it at that time. Dawn and dusk at least at these two noon and 36 times at dusk time. And another thing you should remember is you cannot do Gayathri anywhere and anyhow. You must do it in a clean place, in a posture, proper posture, treat her respectfully. I told you it is a very powerful mantra, she is a Devi, how would you worship a Devi, so just repeating it anywhere, repeating it half, do not do that, it is something very sacred, something very elevating, so you must do it with full respect and then if you cannot do it 108 times at least 12 times intensely with concentration you should do it with the meaning going on in your head and then Gayathri will yield its own fruit. You know people do Gayathri Purushcharan you might have heard of this in Maharashtra thousands of people do it every year. It is repeating 24 lakh Gayathri in a specified period of time and they do it with such intensity after that period you should see their very face has changed. It awakens your entire energy and lifts it to the level of realization it is actually divinizing you so that you may intuit the highest in you, Brahman in you. So this is the power of Gayathri only if you do it you will know it, if you do not do it it will again remain like a theory to you. You know Madan Mohan Malviya who was the founder of BHU Banaras Hindu University he was a great advocate of Gayatri Purush Charan. He used to he did it many times. In fact, many people have done it and it is the best way to change your entire mechanism your very body will change I am telling you, your genes will change, your mind will change because it is awakening the faculty of Dhi within you. If it is done with concentration with complete mind, it will awaken what it is meant to awaken right within you. And these fivefold faculties of higher intelligence are required for success anywhere in your life. Please remember this I told you what are they Dhi then Medha, Prajna, Dhriti and Smriti. These are the fivefold qualities of your intelligence. Dhi is your spiritual heart where you get this knowledge of Brahman, Medha is your higher intelligence, Pragnya is higher awareness, Dhriti is the higher will and Smriti is memory, complete memory so if you want all of these put together practice Gayathri and see it was part and parcel of our life I received the Gayathri when I was very young and usually in India during Upanayana ceremony they give it so the the thing is this all these things have to be done to be known, you have to do something about it, it is not a theoretical concept I just told you, you listen to it and it is done not like that. This is you practice the chanting you will see the change coming over you, mind will just clear up, intelligence will just awaken within you, you will just awaken within you. You will understand all the dimensions of intelligence, not the stupid one unidirectional intelligence which you do not know where it will take you which is dependent on outer objects not that kind. A wholesome holistic form of intelligence which is all integrative, which sees the whole thing all together. This level of intelligence is required for higher you know understanding and Medha actually helps you understand the scriptures, the subtleties a very refined intellect will be generated, the subtleties of the scriptures become graspable. So, all these blessings come with Gayathri. Practice it and see and you yourself will understand what it is about. That is why I gave you the whole story of Gayathri. So, that you remember the story and practice the chanting. Today time is up, we will end here. Thank you.
 We We will start with a prayer. Today, we are going to study the human personality paradigms in Eastern and Western philosophy. Human personality paradigm, which means what is the human personality about? Human personality is defined as a dynamic set of characteristics, a dynamic and organized set of characteristics unique to individuals upon which depend on your motivations, your thoughts, your actions, your behavior, everything depends on these set of characteristics which are unique to the individual. So, this is what we generally call personality. Now, you have a number of personality workshops, all this is going on, but to understand personality the very word in depth you must think about the whole thing you know not just how as you appear to be in ah earlier in Greece you know actors used to talk through a mask. Suppose they had to portray the ah personality of a king, they would have the mask of a king and they would speak through that mask. So, that came to be called persona, us mask ko persona bolte the. From that is derived personality. The Latin word persona means mask and from that is derived personality. Iska matlab hai whatever we think ourselves to be, this body-mind complex, we are actually functioning through it. If you think deeply about yourself, in the last class some small amount of meditation we did on this, these lines. If you think and see, even thought is objective to your experience. You are functioning through this mechanism. So, your personality should cover the whole thing, is not it? Eastern philosophies may they actually take up personality as a trichotomous structure, which means there is the body externally, there is the mind and there is the atman or self. It is due to the presence of this atman consciousness that the body and mind are enlivened and we have this tendency to identify with the body mind complex and we consider that much only to be our personality. So, we are always polishing the surface, but the fact about you is you are a unit of consciousness functioning through a body mind complex. So, the general paradigm of human personality in eastern traditions, meditative traditions, philosophical traditions is a trichotomous structure, did you get the point. In western philosophy it is primarily dichotomous, it is body and mind and the higher mind is called the soul. So, we will go into that also, but first let us cover the eastern paradigm of human personality. Now here when we are talking of self, when we are talking of the Atman, last class we had a some amount of discussion on this. See what are what are they exactly trying to tell you if you go to the Keno Upanishad Keno Upanishad is an Upanishad which starts off with a wonderful description of self who is the real I the unchanging I in me it starts off with a definition see the question put there to the teacher initially as the Upanishad starts is Kene shita patati pre shita manaha kena prana prathama praiti yukta kene shita vaachamimam vadanti chakshu shrotra kau devo yunakti which means what is what is it that impulse my mind to go towards objects. What is the starting point? Look at the gravity of the question. This is what I want you to see. What is it that makes my mind function? This is what he is asking by saying, kena shita patati pre shita manah, kena prana prathama prayati yuktah. What is it that makes my vital energies function? Driven by what do they go and join themselves, do they move, driven by what do I speak, what is speech, what is the source of speech, what is the source of my faculty of sight of hearing, this is the question. Are you getting the the immensity of the question? He is asking for how is perception becoming possible how is mind activity becoming possible and then the answer given is also very deep the answer given is shrotrasya Shrotam he is saying the year of your year, Manaso Mano Yat the mind of your mind, the eye of your eye, the vital energy of the vitality of your vital energy and one who gets to this source factor he is able to come out of the sense life and attain immortality, this is how it is described. Now you see this very phrase it is the year of the year, it is the eye of the eye, how significant it is? Iska matlab hai peeche aisa kuch force hai, there is something which impels your sense organ to go and join with the sense object makes perception simple perception possible. So, this we will be studying in a very big way in the next class, because the session is on mind and perception. But basically here you should catch this point that it is being the your sense organs are being driven by something, there is some factor some force within you which is making that perception possible. The mind itself, if you study simple perception immediately this question will pop up to you. You see when you see any object photons are being thrown into your visual into your visual cortex actually. Photons are colorless it is electromagnetic radiation it goes into your brain and some neurochemistry happens there and you do not perceive photons, you do not perceive neurochemistry you are perceiving a whole set of wonderful colors, a three dimensional world in real time and space. So, how is this becoming possible? So, you see actually science gives you the connection between the object and your brain activity and Yoga Vedanta throw light on the sequence from your brain activity to consciousness. So, the whole thing you can get if you that is why I said combining objective and subjective sciences it will unveil a huge amount of knowledge for us. So this possibility this Upanishad is hinting at by telling you it is the mind of the mind, it is the year of the year that is the nature of consciousness. You know later on in these very verses in these mantras they will be telling us manasaana manute enahur manomatam tadeva brahmatvam viddhi nedam yadidam upasate which means you cannot know it with the mind but it is through that consciousness that the mind knows that is called brahman and not this that people objectively worship here. Ya chakshushana pasyati, yena chakshumshi pasyati, tadeva brahmatvam viddhi, nedam yadidam upasate. Your eyes cannot see it. Can you see consciousness with your eyes? But it is due to the presence of consciousness that the eyes are functioning, that you are seeing and this is that Brahman and not this which people objectively worship it goes on like this. You cannot hear it with your ears but due to its presence the ears are hearing that is this Brahman consciousness which you yourself are it is your real nature don't think Brahman is another concept another object supreme reality like that the I in you signifies a unit of consciousness which is called Brahman your own real nature, the real I in you, the unchanging element in you. Think and see body and mind are constantly changing. As I told you if I showed you a picture of your own infanthood, you will not recognize the picture. You may or may not recognize the picture that much the body has changed, but you have a tendency to feel you are that same person, that same baby became a toddler teenager now you are a young man or young woman. So, what is the what is this continuity that we feel, the I has remained the same all the body has changed mind has changed immensely . So, there is an unchanging element in you of the nature of awareness consciousness which they are researching into. This is what they are telling you about your real self this is supposed to be the core of your personality structure because it is the only unchanging element about you which is called the self and that is why the Upanishads again and again this is the recurring theme of the Upanishads the real you the unchanging you and they will tell you that research into this is possible they researched into it and found that you are of the nature of consciousness eternal, the very essence of being, the very essence of consciousness and the changeless one. In the midst of all this change, there is a changeless unit which you actually are and that is what they are calling the Atman and there is a way to discover this Atman. I was very profoundly affected when your faculty introduced the word discovery into this course. They have given the title of the course as discovery and management of self. They actually wanted to know about self discovery. So, it is possible to go into these great depths of your own personality. Otherwise, you know you will have a very superficial definition of yourself. Agar hum is stand is yahatak na jaye, what will be our understanding of ourselves? Well, I am my thoughts, I am this body, I am these senses, this much will be our understanding of ourselves. But there is something more to you an unchanging datum behind all this which is the most profoundest aspect of your personality because it does not change it is what is lighting up everything else and that is why the mind is functioning the senses are functioning. So, this picture of yourself this knowledge of yourself is vital to your understanding the human personality. It is the source of your knowledge, it is the source of your power, it is the source of everything about you in fact, because of the presence of consciousness you are having conscious experiences in the mind and that is how you are perceiving this world through your mind. So, you see that is the source factor to illustrate this Upanishads use so many techniques there are meditation techniques, there are upasanas, there are vidyas and there are stories also given out to help you understand this. Let me tell you one beautiful story here so that you catch the point firmly. This story also occurs in the Kena Upanishad. It is a very profound Upanishad. This story goes like this. It seems once there was a quarrel between the Devas and Asuras in heaven. This is a story just to illustrate, tell you about something very profound about yourselves. So observe the story. There was a quarrel between, there are periodic quarrels between devas and asuras. So, during one such war the devas managed to drive the asuras out of heaven and once the asuras left and they were killed and hammered and thrown out the devas became very happy and jubilant because they had won the war and they started celebrating and the celebrations went on for a long time. So, you know who these Devas are? The gods with the small g, they are like divine offices in heaven, this is how it is conceived, it is like Indra who is the god of the heaven, Varuna who is the god of the waters, they are all offices, divine offices in control of each element, agni is in charge of fire, vayu is in charge of wind, so these gods they are called lesser gods in Hinduism, so these gods started feeling very arrogant about their victory and they went on celebrating they were over enthusiastic over jubilant. So, then God which Brahman the supreme consciousness he thought that these must be they must be taught a lesson they must be they must be made to think who is it who is responsible for their victory what is the source of their victory. So, he appeared before them in the form of a yaksha, yaksha means a celestial being, a very bright luminous being appeared there and Indra looked at that being and said who is this, who has come into the heavens again and then he sent Agni first to find out who this yaksha was. Agni went to the yaksha and then the yaksha placed a bit of straw in front of him and said, oh I did not know who you are. The Agni said you do not know me I can burn down the whole world, I am the greatest Agni and the yaksha said oh can you please burn this bit of straw for me and then it seems Agni tried his best huffed and puffed and tried to burn down that straw, but that straw would not burn. And then Agni was very felt very strange what is the something very strange is going on here and he went back to Indra and said you see this is no ordinary being something very mysterious going on. So, you send somebody else and we will try to find out what is this. So, he sent Vayu again the bit of straw was placed in front of Vayu and Vayu said you want me to blow out this bit of straw I can do such great things you do not know who I am I am the mightiest God and the Yaksha said yes please blow out this bit of straw now, but he could not do it. He also huffed and puffed and tried to blow out he who creates storms and thunderstorms and hurricanes on earth he could not blow that bit of straw. So, he also came back to Indra and said this is a very mysterious being he is not of the ordinary group. So, try to find out who he is. Then Indra came there. As soon as Indra came, that celestial being vanished. And then, Brahma Vidya, the knowledge of Brahman, came in an embodied form, in the form of a Devi there, Uma Haimavati. And she tells Indra that, don't you know who was this celestial being? He was none other than Brahman, the supreme consciousness who came to show you that without his being there, without his permission, nothing can move. Agni cannot do anything, Vayu cannot do anything, none of you can do anything. So please acknowledge this. And she gave him this Vidya, that is why they say Indra became the greatest of the gods. What is the story trying to tell us? Basically the Upanishad is trying to tell you without the presence of consciousness even mind does not function not to speak of your sense organs nothing will function the mind itself last time I showed you a slide with this figure mind is lit up by consciousness reflected into it and that is how the body also gets enlivened and that is how you are functioning in this world. So, the source factor for all of this is consciousness, the self, the atman standing behind everything due to which you are being able to function in this world. This is what they are trying to tell you. The ontological primacy of consciousness in your personality, this is what they are trying to tell you in the midst of all these stories, through all these verses, they are trying to point out to this. So, this is a basic thing in Eastern philosophy, please understand this the ability to of consciousness to function separate to remain separate from mind function not that mind is consciousness, mind is separate from consciousness, mind is lit up by consciousness that is why you have conscious experiences. This is characteristic of eastern philosophical thought hm especially Yog Vedant. So, here you have a concept of self which is totally independent of mind, mind also is considered to be subtle matter, but consciousness is not matter and that is why it has this ability to exist completely apart from mind function. So, this is what is called the Atman. Now, this is the core of your personality according to all these traditions and that getting reflected into the mind makes the mind function as a conscious entity. Is not it last time in those meditations you could see clearly your mind activity is objective to your being, which means what you are able to control your thoughts if you want to, you are able to control your emotions if you want to, you are essentially apart from them. You go ahead and quickly identify because that is natural normal to the human experience to identify with your thought process, to identify with your emotions, but the real you is awareness which is being aware of that thought, which is aware of that emotion. So, always your experience is always like this that you are able to see your thoughts, you see that is why memory is possible, is not it. You are able to remember what you thought, which means you are apart from your thought, is not it logically correct, metacognition, thinking about thinking, how is that possible? Any neurophysiological activity, you see it for yourself, unless you are apart from your thoughts, how will you remember them yourself, unless you are apart from your thoughts how will you remember them, how will you know them. So, your essential it is pointing only to your essential nature, we have not learnt to think in this way, this is the whole problem. But the all this Upanishadic literature what does it do for you is, it gives you an understanding of your of yourself for transcending your mind, your mental function. So, it helps you control the mind, it gives you a stand apart from your mind and so, it will help you understand everything about the mind, help you handle the mind effectively for your purposes. So, mind is the next element of your personality which is supremely important. You see here let me point out some things initially. Mind is considered to be subtle matter according to Vedanta. It functions on borrowed consciousness. The reflection of consciousness falling in the mind is enlivening the mind and it is functioning and it feeds on objects, sense objects to function, is not it. You need sense data to think. If you actually see what is happening in your mind at this very moment, think and see, you are thinking thoughts based upon what you have seen, what you have heard, your thoughts, your mental activity is based upon your sense perceptions. This is one of the inlets to the mind, is not it, your sense perceptions, what you saw, what you hear, just now you are hearing this talk, so you are thinking along these lines, you are thinking about consciousness, you are thinking about mind function. This is one thing about your thought, the other thing is memory. Even if you are not taking in sense data, there is the unfolding of memory within you, which means in the past what you have thought will keep getting recycled in your mind, it blossoms forth as memory in your mind. This creates your entire mental world, your sense perception, sense data and memories. At any given moment of time, what is creating your thoughts? See this is a very important question for you all because usually you identify yourself only with thought, your thought world. So what is creating my thoughts? It is my sense perceptions and my memories. Now here, Yoga Vedanta make a enormous contribution, understanding for you, in order for you to understand entirely the mechanism of your mind, how you function. When you take in sense data from the external world, ab aap soch lo aapne aaj ek movie dekh liya, you saw a movie today, for the next whole one week, maybe you were, your mind was brooding over that movie, thinking about the same thoughts. So, the content of your mind was to a great extent decided by your sense perception, this is what I want you to see, right? Then what happened as you go on repeating the things which you have seen in your mind, they will become habits, they will become sanskars. Sanskars means strong mental impressions. Then they do not remain in your conscious mind, they go into your subconscious mind, they will remain there. After a long time, maybe after 2 months or after 6 months, they will again blossom forth in the conscious mind and then you call them memories, right. They are nothing but recycled conscious thoughts, you put it in at some point of time, now they are coming forth as memories. So, this entire cycle is going on day and night in your mind. This is a chakra actually which is described in the commentary on Patanjali Yoga Sutras Vyasa Bhashya. It is so important for you to understand how your thought mechanism is functioning. You take in sense data, it becomes your mental impression, it is converted into your memory and this cycle keeps going on and on all the time. And so, you feel I just cannot stop my thoughts, even if I close my eyes, I close all sense perception there is the replay of memory. So, you simply cannot stop the mind. Isiliye hum pooste hai how do I get peace of mind, how do I stop my mind, how do I stop my mind from going into negativities, because we have not understood this basic cycle. Now here let us observe a few more important points. See first thing which you should understand is if you want to change the nature of your mind, what should you change? If you have understood this cycle, you will first of all change your the input, the intake through your senses what you are taking in sense perceptions, you will change the content of that. You will commit yourself only to the good things in life not to negativities. Many times you take in negative impressions from the outside, is not it? And then this is the first thing you will change, secondly you will start working on your memories, so that your memories are positive. Most of your thoughts are memories, please see this, so that you have good memories, positive memories, things which give you happiness and peace. So, these are the two factors upon which you will work. So, please see this, you change your life through your thoughts, through your mind, you change the very nature of your brain through your mind. You know this is a huge field called neuroplasticity in neuroscience. It means what the brain is very plastic, very malleable. At any given point of time if you think the right thoughts, convert them into the right mental impressions and habits, they they have they etch upon your brain and that etching is called an engram. You know your thoughts the neurophysiological correlate of your thoughts in the mind is an engram in the brain. When these thoughts become deep in your mind you are calling them sanskars mental impressions these are neurophysiologically called engrams. Actually the etching of your brain occurs based on these thoughts, based on these sanskars . Regulating thinking properly our thought mechanism is not this true? See your own life hm and you will understand if you have positive thoughts, if you have regulated ordered thinking, clarity in the mind, you can achieve anything just like that. And if this is lacking, then you will be struggling with unnecessary thinking, all sorts of emotions, negativities, somebody is come and puts you into depression, you will be struggling with all this. But, if I have a very regulated thought world, very clear thoughts and a lot of awareness in the mind, then achievement is just a matter of time, success is just a matter of time. So, the essential point is for you to observe this thought mechanism perfectly and understand it. Let me point out to a few more things here. You see, first thing I told you, you change even your brain through your mind, through your thoughts. Secondly, your thoughts are objective to your experience. You are not identified with your thought unless you want to be. Iska matlab hai anything happening in the mind you can perfectly see it as an object. You are distanced from it. If you practice that 5 minute meditation which has been circulated you will get a grip over this. You will understand it by yourself that indeed I am always aware of my thoughts which means I am apart from them. I the awareness I am watching aware of my thoughts, which means I am apart from them. I the awareness, I am watching the thought process. If fear comes into the mind, I the awareness, I am watching the fear. If anxiety comes, I the awareness, I am watching anxiety. So, it will not affect you, it will not grip you, it will not grip your life, it will not make you miserable. This is the great gain of this knowledge, you understand. It actually puts you in a position where you can handle every mental function, then naturally you will have the experiences you want to have, you will have the delights you want to have, is not it. Your thought is in your hands. A capacity that the great knowledge of yog gives you this capacity to change your life as you want it to be. Otherwise it is at the mercy of your sense impressions and your memories whatever you have made them in the past. So, it gives you a hold over yourself. This is the second point which you should know. The third point is, see most people ask this question after understanding the mechanics of the mind, they ask this, but how do I change my memories of the past? I have already created a huge silo of memory as it were, which is functioning within me without my permission. You see, even when you quiet the mind mind so many kinds of thoughts come into that mind isn't it? in the past I have put in so many types of thoughts so many types of emotions now how do I control them? how do I regulate them? so memory is a huge part of study both in eastern and western philosophies because most of your thoughts are memories you know how Yoga Vedanta studies memory you can take a lot of things from this for your practical life if you are alert you will get a number of points how do I handle my memory first of all Vedanta will tell you memory is actually an asset it is one of the greatest clues to show you the existence of the self. How? Memory is possible only if there has been a common factor between two events, is not it? So, it is actually showing you the presence of the atman, the presence of the self, it is hinting towards that. The problem with you is you have messed up with that memory you have put in so much of negative thinking that your memory in a sense has become negative this much has to be corrected. So, how do we do this? See if memory is nothing, but recycle conscious, if I keep changing my conscious thought towards the positive, my memory will one day change, is not it, because it sources conscious thinking, your conscious thinking is becoming your memories. So, if I keep thinking positively, if I keep my sense exposures positive, one day my memories will be very positive and just now I will counteract my negative memories, there are definite methods for this by deliberately bringing positivity into my life. That is why in the yogic sciences, we we actually work upon separating awareness from memory. Separating awareness from memory what does this mean? See you are of the nature of awareness identified with the thought process, when you feel your memory is an impediment to your thinking memories are negative. Through the practice of yoga you can separate the thought process and thus your memory from your awareness. Through the practice of meditation this can be done. If this is done your memory will not have a hold over you. In fact, yoga aims at doing this. If you are able to free yourself from the grip of memory, only awareness will reign in your mind. Ye ek sambhavna hai, it is a possibility. Through the art of meditation this can be done. When awareness dominates the mind, you know the greatest happiness descends into the mind. Because there is no negativity there, you are in your real state, you have touched the real source of your being which is awareness. And memory you only allow that bit of memory to come in which is useful to you which is positive, the rest can be separated kept apart from your experience through the practice of yoga, through the practice of meditation. Also in Vedanta they give you a very profound idea about memory which is also useful to you. See, the very concept of apne shayad suna nahi hai abhi tak adhyas ek concept hai in Vedanta, which is the the actual meaning of it is superimposition. It is a huge theory in Vedanta, which tells you why are we seeing this world of manifestation the way we are seeing it. If actually the reality is only one substratum, one underlying Brahman, why am I seeing the world of manifestation? The answer given to this is because you have superimposed one thing on another. Do you understand the word superimposition? See now suppose let me take the classic example of Vedanta only. You must pay attention otherwise this will escape you. In classical Vedanta we use the rope and snake example. Have you heard of it? Somebody was going home at dusk time, he saw something like a rope lying there, but fear gripped his mind so he actually thought it might be a snake. Then he went close and threw some light on it and saw it is only a rope, it is not a snake. So, the fear left him and he went home. Now in this example, suppose there was a snake on that rope, you would call it imposition. But if you are mistaking the rope for the snake, you call it superimposition. First understand the word superimposition means you are mistaking one thing for another. Now this happens due to memory according to Vedanta. The very one of the very definitions of adhyas is smriti roopa paratra purva drishta avabhasah adhyasah which means due to your memory you are superimposing a thing seen elsewhere, a thing which was cognized elsewhere is being superimposed here due to the memory, functioning of your memory. Now that is why the study of memory is so very important. Unless you are able to separate memory from awareness, delusion will reign, superimposition will occur at a very deep level. Superimposition is a very deep concept which is actually telling you why ajnan has come into the jiva which makes him see only multiplicity. So, memory works at a very deep level that is why the initial techniques of yoga are trying to separate mind from awareness which means the simple thought process from awareness the next advanced techniques will help you separate your memories from awareness. If you can totally extract awareness from the grip of memory, you have passed in yoga, you have passed the test. Do not think these are you know it is only about lecturing and getting the knowledge of it, this is actually about doing. Yeh ek bahut hi practical science hai. Agar aap thoda thoda karte rahoge, you will understand the relevance of these statements which we are making here. These are just theory lectures which I am giving you. The actual thing is to do it. If you are able to extract awareness from the thought process and memory, you, your job is done in a way, hmm, that awareness itself will teach you how to go further. You know in yoga, yogic sciences we say, yoga itself teaches yoga, yoga itself will teach you how to progress in yoga. If you can do these simple pao distancing yourself from the thought process and separating memory and awareness. So yeh aap kar sakte ho, thoda karke dekho at present awareness is entirely invested in memory that is why only your thought appears to be real to you nothing else appears to be real. When you close your eyes initially what happens as if nothing else is there within. So we do not find any interest in meditation. But as you develop, become more and more conscious, as the mind becomes clearer and clearer, the entire interest will be reverted within because awareness now suddenly means a lot to you. This is a change. You know there is a very beautiful story which illustrates this. It is actually a joke. One person was trying to search something in his garden. He was searching for a key in his garden. So his neighbor came running and said, did you lose your key here? And he said, no, no, no, I lost my key in his garden. So, his neighbor came running and said did you lose your key here? And he said no no no I lost my key in the house. Then he asked then why are you searching in the garden? Because there is light here. This may appear very foolish to you we are doing that we are searching for our identity, our happiness, everything only in the sense world because we find light only when you open your eyes If you close your eyes, you feel darkness That's why you don't feel like doing this inner research But through the practice of yoga, through training There is Alok within, Alok is Alok If there is a little training for the mind Andar alok mai hai ya alok hi alok hai. Agar thodi training ho man ke liye. Only this clarity, this light can tell you how to progress further. It is the clarity of your awareness, please see this. Uninvested awareness, not part of mind. It is separate from mind always. Vedanta again and again is trying to in different ways trying to tell you this that just like how you perceive this body as an object see just like how I am seeing this laptop as an object so also is the body an object to you phenomenologically speaking and so also is your thought process that is why there is no common entity called I am the body. There is nothing like this. There is no co-existence of body, thought and I at the same plane. Always it is thought. Through thought you are seeing the body. Through awareness you are seeing even thought. And that is why you are always separate from the body-mind complex. Ye ek sambhavna sirf nahi hai, this is the reality about you. Isko sambhavna karne ke liye a little practice in yoga is required. This is the actual fact about you. So this is the essential thing about the mind aspect of your personality which Eastern philosophy made the main aspects of your personality how they are covering this is what I am introducing you to this is a very huge topic human personality but yeah per home essay study current game because this part of your syllabus. Now the third thing which you should know about human personalities. See we have this tendency why memory has been studied in so many ways even in western philosophies for the simple reason it is the cause for your ignorance and unpurified memory is the cause for your identification with the body mind complex. See constantly you are saying I am the body I am the mind I am my thoughts I am I am my emotions is called anyonya adhyas kehte which means the characteristics of the self are superimposed on the body and thought and the characteristics of thought and body are superimposed on the self which means I say I am fat or I am lean the body is fat or lean but I somehow join the I with that. So, both ways the adhyas is working, that is why my concept of myself becomes just the body-mind. So, this fundamental error is due to superimposition, it is due to the confusion in our memory. If this can be cleared through the practice of yoga, what happens is you become more and more conscious, when you become more and more conscious when you become more and more conscious mind becomes absolutely clear aap hi dekh sakoge aapka swaroop kya hai your awareness itself will lead you to the source of that awareness it will not so easily get invested in anything because you refuse to identify merely with the body mind complex. So, that is why this study is so very important for understanding human personality. Otherwise, you know your sense of yourself will only be based upon what others think of you. If you do not have this level of research, you know this is what will happen. Your sense of yourself is only determined by what your family says about you, that also is secondary, what your friends say about you, what society says about you, how you appear, this will be your superficial sense of yourself. And so, you are at the mercy of every single person's comment, every single person's idea about you, you have nothing by yourself to know about yourself. Only this kind of a subjective research gives you a sense of yourself completely apart from all this. Hai na? Hmm? That is why this philosophy is strength giving. Vivekananda hamesha yeh bolte the, it will put you on your own feet. You have a sense of yourself completely independent of what others say about you or think about you even because you know the essence of your personality. So, this is where this research actually leads you to, it gives you immense strength and clarity. The third aspect of your personality after the self and mind is the body. In most of these Eastern traditions, the body is considered to be a garment you are wearing and stitched together by your karma, by your thought and by your desire. These are the three threads you use to stitch this garment of the body. You know karma, hum jo karma karte hain, that to a great extent decides the kind of body we get. And the experiences that body will go through and the life span of that individual, all of this is decided by karma. and then your thought mechanism right now you can feel it if you are in a very stressed out state it will tell on your body also isn't it your thought mechanism decides how your body is and your desire the basic emotional equipment within you your will all these contribute to the creation of your body. So, if you want the body to be at ease, if you want the body to remain healthy, you must take care of all this the the threads with which you have stitched up the body. It is not enough to consume a pill and consider ourselves to be healthy, is not it? hm Aaj kal na it has become a a kind of trend to try to be healthy through external factors, through supplements, by ah changing your neuro chemistry. You tell me one simple thing, if you want to be happy and joyous, if you take a injection of dopamine which is supposed to be your pleasure hormone, do you think you will be joyous? If you take an injection of dopamine, it is a neurochemical which is responsible not the hormone, it is a neurochemical responsible for the feel of pleasure. Will a shot of dopamine make you happy? It will not unless your mind is happy unless your thought is beautiful peaceful that is why I said you change everything to the power of your thought you have to summer's may I a point how do you feel joy you don't feel it as dopamine or adrenaline you feel it as a lightness as a buoyancy in your system as a joy in your mind as happiness in your mind so take care of your mind that is most important how do you feel pain you don't feel it as a serotonin or epinephrine you feel it as agony in your heart so take care of your emotions take care of your thought and emotion, so take care of your emotions, take care of your thought and emotion, you will take care of your states of mind and your life. Do not try to bring in external giving into drink to addictions, all this is not going to control your emotions and thought or bring happiness into your life, it will only addict you towards that. If you can handle your thought process maturely, you will always be happy. Hai na? Isiliye yog ek aisa maarg hai jo it brings the natural innate happiness into manifestation in your life. You do not require synthetic things to keep you happy. Isko, inko synthetic joys bolte hain which means I require something external to keep you happy is called inco synthetic joys both a which means I require something external to keep me entertained and happy otherwise I will go into depression. So, do not become such a slave to these things it is in your own experience you are capable of handling your thought process is clearly a methods and techniques a which also we will be going into deeper into that, but understand how this whole mechanism works. So what are the three aspects of your personality which we studied? First of all the self, the Atman, then the mind and then the body which is a manifestation actually a creation of your mind. So if I have to handle, I mean get joy out of my experience of life, I must be able to pay the right attention, handle all of these three properly. So, isiko sadhana kehte hai. Tuning in to the reality of life, not to live on superficial and synthetic planes. This is what yoga and Vedanta are trying to teach you. See it is a do it yourself technique. Every technique of yoga is a do it yourself method. They are not asking you to believe in something. Is it a belief system? Tell me. It is a science. Is not it? It is not a belief system. In belief systems you can fall into all sorts of trouble. Let me tell you another small story here because all of you have become so serious. Let me tell you this. See, there is one there was one little child who had this tendency of coming home very late. He was 5, 6 years old all the time playing with his friends and he would come home late at night 8 o clock 9 o clock. So, the mother was very worried this fellow is playing with his friends for such a long time. So, she frightened him by telling him you know there are ghosts which come out once it is dark and they can catch you. So, do not play out for so long come come home before it is dusk. So, the child got frightened and started coming home early. Then this fear remained with that child. So, that when he became a teenager also he would be frightened to go out in the dark and he even to go for errands, to go to his friends house, to go for studies, tuitions, he could not go. So, then the mother gave him a medal a talisman Jo yaha bante hai and told him this will protect you from the ghost so you go. So, this is what belief systems do hm creating a problem and then giving you a remedy for it. These are no belief systems these are sciences in, it is a do it yourself technique. If you plunge into your own mind, you will discover all of this yourself, there is no need to believe. In fact, if you do not believe even better, you will arrive at it by yourself. Is it a fact that my awareness is apart from my mind function? Is it a fact that my awareness is apart from my mind function? Is it a fact that my thought is objective to my experience? Is it a fact that I am able to see the body and handle it as an object? Is it a fact that my memories can be cleansed? It is for you to discover it by yourself. Yehi mein aapko keh rahi hoon. Isiliye do that 5 minute meditation every day to get charge over yourself. Now we will move on to the second part of this theory lecture which is on western philosophy what has it to say about the human personality paradigm, human personality structure. I told you it is essentially dichotomous which means to say it considers body and mind to be the two aspects of myself self and what is called soul is actually the higher mind. Usually this it is not that people have not discovered the self there what we are calling the Atman, but this is the general understanding a dichotomous personality structure. If you actually compare let me show you a slide here which will help you understand this even better. If you actually compare and see both these stands see here just observe this Eastern philosophies and Western philosophies observe this slide you see in Eastern philosophy the the concept of self let me just go through this a bit has been different in different philosophies but in the Shat Darshan which we discussed in the last class the concept of self or Atman is similar slight variation is there that it is a unit of consciousness separate from body and mind. But you see some other Eastern philosophers have given different versions of the self like Atiprakrit, sun as self, the Charvaks used to consider body or sense organs, even prana, even mind as self, Shanika Vidya, intellect as self, the six orthodox schools which we discussed, shat darshan, atman as self, sankhya and yoga philosophies, purusha as self, the bhattas which means mimamsakas because kumarila bhatta was one of their main propounders. So he considered consciousness with ignorance as self, the buddhist with ignorance as self, the Buddhist consider void as self, Vedanta considers pure consciousness as self. Now observe this, the concept of self might have been different in many of these philosophies, but the essential philosophies based on the Vedas, the Shat Darshan, they have very similar concept of self. Only the Purush, the difference between self Purusha and Atman, Sankhya and Vedanta was this Purushas are many in number. This is how Kapila saw it. Consciousness because it is individualized in so many, it it appears as many, but it is an appearance. Vedanta that is why that is the culmination of this thinking Vedanta. It will tell you that it is one consciousness only reflected in different minds, so it appears to be different. So, similar idea of self consciousness apart from body mind function, this is the crux of the whole thing this is the glory of this philosophy actually Vedant pointing out to the source of your being the real you. Now in western philosophies you can see last time we discussed this Abhishekna's floating man experiment right which means if you cut off a person from all sensations, still he will have a sense of his presence and that is why self awareness is something something there in the human being. The human being is essentially self awareness, sensations are secondary. So, this kind of an understanding has come from many philosophers in the west. You will see today the most common theories are what is called the emergent phenomenon which means ah you know even science subscribes to this. They say that consciousness is an emergent property of the brain. Brain is primary and consciousness is as it were a byproduct of the brain. There are many scientists who are for this many many who are against this. So, it is a point of debate. Then soul or higher mind is also considered to be the self by many western philosophers. Then there is this bundle theory of self, you see this is these are some of the theories which you should understand hm. Try to understand step by step I will put it forth as simply as possible. What does the bundle theory it was propounded by Hume David Hume the Scottish philosopher of 19th century. He said that actually what you are feeling in the mind is nothing, but perceptions continuously moving in flux. So, a bundle of this perceptions is what is called self, this was his idea of self. Then you have the center of gravity theory which means it was propounded by Dennett who said that you know it is a convenient fiction the concept of self. There is if you actually penetrate and see you do not find anything called self like in center of gravity, if I say the center of gravity of this bottle, now there is a center of gravity, but you cannot see it, but you needed to solve problems of physics, is not it, a center of gravity. So, also there is a center of reference called the self, but you cannot see it, it is not something tangible. So, this is another theory, these are all theories how different philosophers have thought. After that you have the syntactic theory, it is again a construct which means it is a the yourself is a tool for self reference in order to refer to I, myself, herself, yourself. So, I use the word self this was propounded by Sloman. So, he said that it is just a tool for self reference we do not know if there is anything called a self. Then some people consider the self to be memory concretized this is another theory for self. And then there have been the mystics of the west who have come very close to the Vedantic idea of Atman like Mishra Akat used to call it essential being, Kant called it subject in itself, and then Schaufenhauer who went a little further than Kant and came close to the Vedantic idea of Atman he called it being in itself, the self, and then Edmund Husserl called it transcendental ego, Paul Tillich called it true being, Aldous Huxley called it the eternal self, Emerson who was very much influenced by Bhagavad Gita, Eastern thought, he called it the eternal one. Many of these philosophers have talked about the possibility of the existence of pure consciousness in itself what Vedanta is calling the Atman they have talked about it. In fact, Kant came close to the idea of what in Sankhya is called the Purusha he came close to that idea and that is why Vivekananda once commented that Vedanta begins where Kant ends. Schaufenhofer came close to the idea of the Atman, pure consciousness. So, you see mystics speak the same language, everywhere people have intuited the presence of this this the self pure consciousness apart from mind function. But in with ah in India it became a full scale philosophy which has it is a living philosophy even today we are discussing it we are practicing it yoga and philosophy yoga and vedanta are living philosophies here. So, a whole lot of mind it is part of a collective memory that is why you will find yogis here and there in IITs there are plenty of yogis. You will find people deeply interested in this because of the simple fact it is part of our collective memory. We have learnt to think about the reality of this. Isiliye yeh strike karta hai humein. See how many of you are deeply interested I can see it. So this is the point, this can be researched into. So this is a general idea about self in different philosophies. Now, after we go through this let us come to the concept of mind in western philosophy. See the higher mind many philosophers consider the higher mind only to be the self, hm which means there is a lower mind and a higher mind a lot of psychological ah understanding came through this disciplines did the different branches of psychology in understanding the mind just like how in India the Patanjali yoga sutras the the yoga system through enormous light on the nature of the mind especially the functional classification of the mind how it works how to change thoughts all of this memory we discussed. So, also in western philosophy a lot of energy has been invested in the study of the mind and the contributions I think you know something of it of Freud, Jung, Adler giving us the structural classification of the mind, the presence of the subconscious and unconscious. So, all this contributed to the advancement of psychology in the west. And finally, they also came to an understanding a very solid understanding of memory, they have exhaustively studied memory. You know in fact, the self by some philosophers is considered to be a self memory system, which means the self is nothing nothing but self images plus memory. And the whole understanding of memory it is useful for anybody it is a whole science in itself see let me tell you the understanding of memory in Western psychology. This understanding is important to all of us you see memory has been divided into long term memory and short term memory, just keep your eyes on the slide hm. In long term memory, short term memory you know what it is about, ah just in in a very small span of time what you can retain is short term memory. But long term memory is important for us to understand for various reasons, it is of two types the memory which stays with you, which is part of you. You see it is of two types declarative which means explicit memory and non declarative which means implicit memory. Explicit memory means it is part of your conscious mind, you can consciously revive it. Implicit memory means it is not part of your conscious mind, it is in the subconscious. Now in declarative memory again you have episodic memory and semantic memory. Please see that episodic memory is events, actually they are episodic means episode like snapshots of your personal past you can say which come into your conscious mind and semantic memory means facts which flow in your conscious mind. Now this episodic memory is very important both of these memories actually please pay attention to this try to understand what I am I am going to give you some very important points here. Episodic memory are snapshots of your personal past which are available to your conscious mind. Now, these snapshots of your personal past are very deep rooted. Even people with amnesia have a coherent sense of self and they can give you an autobiographical sketch of themselves. Only Alzheimer's removes this. So, episodic memory is primarily your memory, semantic memory is facts about yourself, episodic memory just like how it provides you can say the phenomenological continuity of your identity, semantic memory provides the narrative continuity of your identity, it is facts about yourself. So, both of these constitute a huge part of your memory and it is it is yourself basically speaking because most people it is not the Atman what I am meaning to say is because people identify with their thought process with their memories essentially it is your episodic and semantic memory that you are identifying with. So you see here specific personal experiences from a particular time and space constitutes episodic memory and facts all the knowledge you collect from outside world knowledge, objective knowledge, object knowledge, language knowledge, conceptual priming. So, these form the essential part of your long term memories. And the second thing is implicit memories you have see they are not available to your conscious mind, you cannot recollect them just like that, but they will pop up in your mind go to the last bit there all your skills both motor and cognitive, they have become part of your memory is not it. Automatically you can do many things like drive a motorcycle or change the gears of your car automatically it is happening. Why it has become part of your memory system, part of your non declarative implicit memory, perceptual priming, conditioned responses, these are all non declarative memory. Then habits, habits and sensitization all these have become part of your non declarative implicit memory, a kind of long term memory. So, you see the these are all facts about ourselves which we should know in order to understand how our mind is functioning. Is not this very interesting, what constitutes the you as the mind, what what are the essential things which you should know is this bit. And after this is of course, we have the third aspect of the human personality body you have the whole medical science telling you everything that you need to know about the body how it is functioning your neurophysiology your neurochemistry how is it that you see mind affects body isn't it. If you have a solid knowledge of mind it will itself give you a good knowledge of the body. Do not try to know body just as body, it is through the mind, through your let me give you a simple example. Suppose you are in a state of anxiety, where is the actual cause for your anxiety or stress? Tell me. The root cause is in your mind. Just taking something in the body for the body will not remove the causal condition, is not it? The cause lies in your mind. So, even to change the body, even to improve the body, the health of the body, you require a certain hold over your mind. So, even to change the body, even to improve the body, the health of the body, you require a certain hold over your mind. People who are habitually calm, very one pointed and people who practice a certain amount of yoga, you know a certain calmness comes even into the body. A certain kind of ability to control your emotions, ability to remain still naturally comes into the body regulated breathing, these are all part and parcel this is one unit please see this the body mind complex and you are apart from it. So, if you train this unit by itself it will keep functioning properly, but if we do not have enough knowledge of this then well you need external things to keep the body and mind happy. Today this has become a huge problem the different forms of addictions even the addictions on for over the internet of mobile it is all due to your incapacity to control your mind and no amount of training has happened to the body. So, it affects your bodily health you know people who are in depression they sleep for long hours and they take all sorts of drugs just to keep calm tranquilizers. So, aisi halat kyu hone chahiye such a precious human life we have and you can attain so much through this if you only regulate your energies, discipline the body and mind a little, understand these basic facts about your own personality and you can lead a glorious life. So, this is why this is being given to you. Next thing I do not want to go into the bodily aspects more because you have the whole of medical science giving you all the facts about it, but here we will dwell on one thing which you have to know. Philosophical perspectives on ah personality types this is also part of your curriculum because see there is a world of difference in thinking these philosophical perspectives affect my personality and in thinking my personality decides the perspectives. If you just observe this slide, look at the first content of this slide, freedom versus determinism, which means free will will each of these points which I have again 5 points there they are huge philosophical debates which have been going on for centuries. What is the truth about human experience is it free will or is it determinism? Have you heard about this earlier we had a huge session on this in the last course. Is man free to do what he wills or is everything preordained, predetermined? To yeh question kabhi kabhi haware man mein aata hai na? How will you solve this? It is a philosophical question. Am I free to do whatever I want or are there forces responsible for my doing whatever I want to do. So, the answer to this is if a man is fully conscious, he is free. Otherwise, there are external and internal factors which are responsible for what you will do. So, it is a predetermined thing. So, if you have made yourself conscious not compulsive, if you have moved away from compulsive habits made yourself conscious yes free will is there for you. So, you see the personality affects the perspective and not exactly that the philosophical perspective is affecting the personality. This is the great glory of the yogic sciences, it makes you independent of everything. Each of these philosophical points you can see is they are huge debates. See when you grow up and when suppose you get to debate upon all of this, you will understand for centuries thinkers have invested a lot of thought on trying to solve these things, uniqueness versus individuality. A B Abdiki is the human being unique or is there a common factor in all human beings there are both sides are very strong. Like this question discusses the extent of each persons humans individuality or uniqueness versus similarity in nature or universality. Abraham Maslow, Karl Rogers were all advocates of the uniqueness of individuals. In contrast mystical traditions are speaking of a universal dimension to human personality. What is the truth? This again depends on the level of development of the human personality. If he has become a fully conscious being he is universal in outlook because the nature of awareness is inclusive one awareness shining in all beings. And if he has not made himself that way he is stuck to the body and mind he will be exclusive is not it, he will be just an individual one individual. So, you see each of these perspectives depends upon the level of development of the individual. Take the next one active versus reactive, this also you see this question explores whether humans primarily act through individual initiative or through outside stimuli. Traditional behaviorist typically believed that humans are passively shaped by their environments whereas, humanistic and cognitive theorists believe that humans are more active in their role. Now, what is the reality about this? Again it depends upon how you have made yourself that will decide whether you are active or merely reactive. So, also optimistic versus pessimistic again it is a condition of your mind. What is the nature of the mind you have developed? Nature versus nurture, this is also a huge debate in educational circles. Again what you see if you are strong enough within, if you have created the right sanskars, what comes to you in the form of external stimuli will be secondary. You have your own stand, your strength is within yourself. If you have made yourself like that, anything coming from outside will be of secondary importance to you. Hain na? But if you are nobody, if you have not created this inner strength, not penetrated within yourself, not ordered your mind, clarified your mind, you are at the mercy of every outside stimuli stimulus and that is why then you see the joint influence of outside factors on you. So, please see this the personality ultimately is going to decide the perspective. What we make of ourselves in life is supremely important. Vivekananda always used to say this that you are the makers of your destiny, you are the creators of your destiny. If you know how to regulate and handle your body mind complex, if you give it some minimal amount of training, you can take your whole life into your hands. And if you are a mere compulsive individual, compulsive itself means you are compelled by something outside to make changes. If you have made yourself like that, then yes external factors are going to rule you. So, development of human personality means essentially this not polishing merely the surface developing your mind, your higher faculties, developing this higher intellect Dhi, which is able to understand all of this and developing growing in self knowledge, knowledge of the real unchanging you. If you take this as the scheme of development, then I can tell you you will make a glorious human personality, a personality who will contribute greatly to the advancement of everything in this world and bringing great happiness to yourself also, great success in your own life. And if you do not work on your essential personality, mind and the higher nature of the mind, then you will remain stuck to external forces, depending on a little thing, little things to keep you happy and entertained, and sort of a slave to the external world. So, the point in giving you all this information is this only, you will develop your personality by yourself, understanding all this, learning a few of these techniques. We will stop today's session here. This session was only on human personality. Next time we have a very important session on mind and perception. Don't skip that session because how the mind works in perceiving, this is what we are going to study. We will end today's session here. This is what we are going to study. We will end today's session here.
 Music Today's session we are going to focus on developing willpower, developing the will actually how do you develop it and also on decision making which is so it becomes a very important session for you. How do you take the right decisions and also the effect of work that is your will on all your different faculties like the cognitive aspect of you, the effective aspect of you connect connective aspect it is called and of course, on the volitional aspect. Because you know it is through work only thing you can do is work on all this is not it through work how do you develop do is work on all this isn't it through work How do you develop all these faculties? This is what we will be discussing today Regarding developing will Take the life of any great leader of this world people who have changed the face of history Great leaders of all nations any nation nation, you will see will determination is very well developed, definite goals and they are out to achieve those goals. So development of willpower take the case of first instance, I would say Winston Churchill's role in the Second World War. You see he was made Prime Minister of Britain, Great Britain in 1940 when the war had broken out 10th May 1940 and he played such a decisive role. He actually united the allied powers and then overthrew the German Nazi force. He was a very wonderful speaker, orator, defiant and heroic and he made all his strategies his ah both political and military strategies were well planned very decisive and yet simple and he succeeded in ah bringing a huge lot of people on his side succeeded in making a huge number of people actually conform to what he held to be right. So, the personality of the man made the victory over the Second World War and in 1945 finally, Germany lost and the war concluded towards these allied powers. They won the war, the victory was theirs. So you see if you study the his life, you will see the personality of the man mattered a lot, how he took decisions, how he made strategies and how he commanded respect from his people. So what was behind all this, a tremendous will, one pointed effort at something this is one case another case I can tell you is you see the life of this simple young man till the age of twenty nine maybe he he was not even well known I am talking of Vivekananda till he went to the Chicago parliament of religions and once he was there he did not have credentials, you might be knowing this, he was not not accredited by any organization, he did not have an organizational backup, but he took his entire audience by storm. Isn't it? In that Columbus Hall, if you know, if you remember, 7000 people rose to their feet as soon as Vivekananda uttered the words sisters and brothers of America. This was also on 11th September 1893 at the world's parliament of religions. So you see what was behind this personality this is what you should see. What commanded this level of power and this kind of an expression which made all the entire audience stand on their feet they applauded him for 2 minutes and they took to his ideas just like that. So what went into the making of these personalities? If you take Gandhiji's case also, third case we can point out, great leaders of the world. In in fact, about Gandhiji, his method of getting us freedom was so novel, so out of this world that Einstein you know he once said that the future generations will not even believe a man called Gandhi walk this earth. Getting a subcontinent free just by the power of satyagraha by the power of ahimsa non violence it is a remarkable thing in today's violent world is not it. So, what was behind this man? He was so adamant and willful about certain principles in his life, absolutely committed to that, absolutely honest, he believed in ahimsa, he believed in truth, absolutely committed to that in all walks of life. So, this generated enormous willpower and through this they achieved all that they had to achieve. They changed the very face of humankind you can say, the very face of human history. So, you see developing will is so, very important. Now, what are the factors which help you develop will? In in short form I can tell you well it is your actions performed in a particular attitude that develop your will, but what are the actual factors which are going to help you in your actions. You see one by one I have put it in the form of points we will go through them. First of all goal oriented action which means committing your intellect to definite goals. Without goal orientation can you have willpower tell me? I do not know what I want to do, I do not know where I want to go in life will I have willpower if I am like this? See you people have definite goals only thing is if you are changing goals after 4, 5 years after you finish your course here you may change your goals. If you keep changing goals, you are actually changing the direction of your will. If you keep doing that, you will lose your will, which means what? There must be an immediate goal, there must be definite goals what you want to become as a result of your immediate goals that must be fixed. What kind of a life do I want to lead as a result of my career, as a result of my job, as a result of the family I will make, what kind of a life I want to live, how should it be, what is my ideal of a great life, how do I want to contribute to society, these are fixed ideals which you must fix right now. I want to lead an ideal life, a life where I can contribute to society, where I can be useful to others. I want to lead a highly respectful life of great contribution. If you have this kind of a fixed goal, everything else which works as as your immediate goal will lead you towards that. So, you will make a great career, you will get the best job opportunities, is not it? You will be able to select amongst them, you will be able to take the right decisions in your life because you have this kind of a idealistic goal to achieve. If you do not have an ideal, you know you you will keep changing directions. Even for your immediate goals you can keep changing directions. I know one IIT student who actually went out of IIT because he at one point he decided he did not want to pursue engineering and he took up some normal course some BA or something. So, this can happen if you do not have intense goal orientation, you after sometime you get sort of disoriented, you just you can leave the road. So, do not do this a definite plan not a I am not saying a complete blueprint, but a definite plan of what kind of a life you want to lead, where you want to go as a result of what you are working with here, where do you want to go. So, if these goals are fixed you know Vivekananda once said If a man with an ideal commits a thousand mistakes A man without an ideal will commit ten thousand If you don't have an ideal Ultimately where do you want to go? What kind of life do you want to lead? If you don't think about this You know you will keep changing directions in your life And you will keep changing directions in your life and you will get nowhere. So, even your immediate goals must have a definite route finally, a definite direction to move in. This is what I am saying. Do you get the point? Hmm. When you come to a crossroad, which road do you select? It depends on your destination, isn't it? If you have no destination, any road. So, this is what you will do if you do not have a destination. So, immediate goals and ultimate final goal of life, both these goals you must have um short term goals, long term goal, fix it up what kind of a life you want to lead as a result of what you are doing today. So, this is important for this certain to in order to develop your will towards goal orientation constantly, there are certain fundamental things you must take care of. So, that you do not keep changing directions, first thing is you must organize your life to a certain extent. Today we are going to study organizing knowledge systems also, but organizing life what do I mean is a kind of see if you maintain an outer routine life you can have a very intense inner creative life. If your outer life is without any routine your inner life is hampered it will not express that much creativity, it will not come out of you. You know that is why a routine life. Routine money not that is something boring, your external life is guided in such a way that your energies remain in your hands. So, that your inner life flowers, blossoms that is the purpose. Do you understand people who lead very haphazard lives their minds also remain very haphazard and they are not able to have this what is called creative motivations ah left very left brain people you know they they cannot have they cannot understand creativity basically. So, what I am telling you is if you have an outer routine life which at this point of time maybe you do not understand because you are all young people you believe in adventure and this and, but the thing is if you sort of organize your external life in such a way it gives you maximum internal energy at any given moment of time then you can have great creative capacities blossom within you. This is what creative people actually do. They organize their external life. Yes. At this point, I would like to say that there are people like, let's say Shah Rukh Khan. He says that I sleep only for four hours. I work at night. I don't have a fixed schedule. And, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and the, um, and I sleep only for 4 hours, I work at night, I don't have a fixed schedule. And the business people who have succeeded in their 20s and in their 30s, they say that we have to be ready to work at any time. I mean, we should constantly expect the unexpected and helpers are is the way of life today. So, I just and actually we have their impressions on us. We see that, okay, he is doing this, he is doing that. We have that heroic feeling for them and we feel that they are doing something tough right because routine is easy. So, I would like you to explain this. No, not explain this I know that you are right that routine is important, but you can help rewire our way of thinking upon that. Good. So, as long as you admit that yes this is important what we are discussing here a routine life is important in order to be creative within you. Otherwise what happens is your creative urges will all go only in putting your outer life in place. You understand? Yeh hota hai. See the thing is to the extent I am able to control my mind to that extent I will be able This is what happens. Try doing this yourself. to the extent I have inner control then I can use those very psychic energies for positive efforts you do it yourself and see see before you try to follow others, any other life you must to a certain extent first of all read idealistic lives this is first point I will tell you read the lives of people who have achieved great goals in life something very idealistic, something which has brought great positive benefit to others ah. See their lives. Secondly, to in your own mind try to experiment and see if I make my outer life very ah erratic, am I able to keep my energies in place or do they just always lead me outward, do I become restless as a result see you can also lead a life in such a way that there is no psychic energy left in the mind it's all dissipated in just organizing external life so to prevent this we say not 100% routine life but to a great extent regulated life if this you lead try doing it a little bit bit you will understand it yourself why we say this to a certain extent regulate your external life which means avoid unnecessary distractions useless talks gossiping wasting psychic energy on and things which are not going to matter to you lead a little more concentrated life more attention to your goals a thoda sattvic ways of living, a little bit of yoga, getting up early in the morning and putting some fresh good thought into your mind first thing in the morning. If you practice few of these things, you will see there is a lot of different kind of happiness comes into your life. Then you will change your priorities by yourself. You understand before you follow somebody else think for yourself is go carnation calf item illegal or do start a second calf item illegal. Think for yourself a certain experimentation on your part also I I expect try to do what I am telling you and see for yourself in one month's time as I told you in the last class you will see a definite change in yourself hm. So, they can organizing life to a certain extent and disciplining mind which means what you are focused on what you want to attain ok. You know how some people focus 10 minutes of intense focus, 10 minutes of very much required distraction, 10 more minutes of focus, 10 more minutes of distraction. You cannot go on like that with an intense life. Sustained focus, sustained concentration this must become natural this is only possible if your mind to a certain extent is disciplined. If the mind is absolutely without discipline kisi bhi samay uthe I never had breakfast I straight had brunch then I skipped lunch then afternoon kisabi I I just wasted time all the time if you lead a completely erratic life all the time your mind will be restless and yearning for external entertainment it can't focus that is why routine is important ye abhi aapke liye difficult hai you see after sometime you will just yearn for a certain balance in your life and the more it becomes routinized on the external front the more creative you become within this is the great gain of a routine life it's not monotonous please see this you may be afraid that it may become a something monotonous no it doesn't it blossoms your mind your creativity a A little routine is good for you. It is good for you. Try it and see. It is purely experimental. Try it and see if it is true or not. And then another thing which is important in your goal orientation is See, purity of intention. Absoluteness of intention is very important, 100 percent commitment which means what, dekhi aapko agar ek cheez chahiye, if you are constantly thinking of something else or sidelining that issue, then it is not actually your need, it is not your intention to have that particular goal. You do not make a goal out of majority opinion, is not it? My father said and my mother said and my grandfather said, so this is my goal. You do not make a goal out of majority opinion, is not it? My father said and my mother said and my grandfather said, so, this is my goal. Can this be your goal? Your goal is always what you want intensely and into which you can give your energies totally. So, 100 percent purity of intentions is required for complete goal orientation, which means what my intention is very clear this is what I want in life. You should be able to say that at this age after 14 any young person should be able to say this this is what I want to do with my life. So, this try to generate this absolute purity of intention. When I say yes I want this 100% I want. If I say no 100% no. This will help you keep one unidirectional movement towards your goals. Otherwise again constantly because somebody decided my goals for me, you understand. Another thing is you see in the topic of habit, we we discuss that your habits what are they actually they are psychic grooves, is not it through which your psychic energy flows. They are grooves created in your brain in your mind and etched on your brain as it were through which your psychic energy is flowing. So, once you create a habit you know you are actually neuro sculpting your brain, it is called neuro the word itself is neuro sculpting it is used in neuro physiology. Why you are how you are doing this is actually by continuously repetitively thinking of some particular thing, you know you create a groove in your mind which means an you etch something in your brain through which things become easier for you to do through which your psychic energy will continuously keep flowing. Once you have done that you have created a road for your psychic energy a neural pathway you can say for your energies to flow and this also determines your neurochemistry which means what how you are going to react towards that particular object in which you have made a habit um that that it it directs that this habit will direct your your very chemistry. For example, let me give you an example suppose you make it a habit to have fruit juice every day from that stall when you are going going back after your classes. The very sight of that place will inspire you to take up something take up ah some something which is nutritious for you. Suppose you are inclined towards only eating fast food, then you know what will happen the moment a picture comes into your mind an image or you go in that direction. The habit has been formed your entire mind will only want to do that. Once you have created a habit, you have created neural pathways, it will lead you towards that only. So, abhi se agar achche habits kar lo, when you get up early in the morning, early in the morning suppose you make it a habit to get up, then what will happen is if you have gathered enough data in your mind as to the beauty of nature at that time, the calmness of the atmosphere, the natural concentration which you have, if all this has come into your experience and recorded and kept, then it will be easier for you to get up again and again and make this a habit. So, what exactly are you doing? You are creating your neural pathways and neural chemistry through your habits. So, if you train yourself in good habits, you see through your willpower, then your life will be very smooth easy what you want to achieve will be very clear clarity will come into life. So, try to do this see to what extent you can do it. The third thing is concentration just trying to develop concentration builds your willpower how it builds your will. Because concentration you know attention the very definition of attention is it is actually a beam of your awareness directed by your will, your will is involved in any act of attention. So, the more you practice attention and concentration the more your will builds up and intense levels of sustained concentration you must make it a habit. Then you do not need diversion. In fact, it irritates you. Diversion, you are totally fixed, reverted to the work at hand. Whatever you are doing, whatever you do when you get up in the morning, your studies, preparing for some particular assignment, preparing for your exams, playing basketball or football, whatever you do 100 percent attention to that. If you attempt this will will go on developing, will power will naturally develop. You know very intense concentration is a possibility for all of us. We are not used to it, we have ah dissipated our powers as it were and that is why it appears to be a great achievement now. It is not so. The natural state of your mind is one of attentiveness. See this, usko discursive mechanism mat karna by repeatedly constantly watching ah something on your ah mobile screen like this if you ah unconsciously make habits like this what will happen is you lose upon concentration . You know in in Vivekananda's life such intense concentration you will find once ah when Vivekananda was in Belur Math I do not know if you know this incident one Sarath Chandra Chakravarti one of his ah disciples he enters his room and he sees ah 14 volumes of Encyclopedia Britannica 14 glistening volumes were there and he said oh these have come very good and Swamiji have you read them? And Vivekananda said, I have read 10 volumes already. And he said 10 volumes so quickly just now they have come just a few days back they had come and he said, but did you read it thoroughly? He said, you asked me anything in those 10 volumes, first 10 volumes and you know, he went on asking and Vivekananda could tell verbatim at some places what the what was written in the volumes. How is this possible you tell me once he has read it may be with intense concentration 10 itne bade bade volumes and he remembers everything anything you ask him he is able to tell. Because you know our eyes are like video cameras, what you fix them upon they will soak that data that information and put it into your brain. But if the if the brain and the mind is unsteady, what the video cameras are taking in will not stay there. You cannot retain knowledge if your mind is not steady. Isliye anything which distracts you, it's actually a negative influence on you. You understand? Kyu kehate hain? Keep away from distractions. Because if your mind is not stable, you cannot absorb knowledge. It depends, knowledge depends upon stability of your mind, calmness of your mind. Very alert, yet intense alert, intense and concentrated. This should be the natural state of a student . Then you will see getting knowledge is very easy. You will actually soak in the information keeping the mind somewhere and again and again if you read what is the meaning of that. 100 percent concentration you bring in you do not you do not time sort of time dilation effect will occur. You are just taking in all information . So, it is a question of mind management, my development in the mind, it is not how many hours you spend on your books. This is a possibility you can train yourself towards it. The secret of this again is given by Vivekananda, what to do to develop intense concentration you must take up one idea the the thing at hand ah which you are concentrating upon. And Vivekananda says take up one idea, think of it, dream of it, live on that one idea. Let your muscles, brain and nerves everything be full of that one idea and leave every other idea alone. This is the secret of success . If you allow 10 things to enter into you and pay attention to none of them, you cannot develop concentration powers . Just now that is why the entire orientation should be towards your studies. I must get my M.Tech and PhD very at the very highest level I should be towards your studies. I must get my M Tech and PhD very at the very highest level I should be able to perform and your job is waiting for you a great job. So, just now this should be the natural disposition, your natural characteristic. If you make concentration a habit you see nothing is very difficult and if now only you are very distracted constantly wanting entertainment constantly discursive mechanism you have developed in the mind then it is very difficult to get achievement in life . So, train it is a mind management technique then conservation of psychic energy. I told you see unless doing unnecessary useless things which are not going to matter to you just because your friends are doing it peer pressure you being so intelligent you must not get into all this you understand you must have a will which stands apart from others if required and they will follow you if your will is on the right road. So, just because your friends are doing this or somebody told you to do it it is not not that you must go in the direction you want to go you must do that which you want to achieve is not it for that avoid all anything that is not that does not matter that does not build your life like for example, gossiping, useless talks, leading reading all sorts of literature, then daydreaming wasting time on all this today too much engagement with the with YouTube videos or anything on the mobile. Do not waste your time on all this that way you will lose psychic energy, you will get exhausted with that only where is the time to concentrate on what you want to achieve. So, you see the entire ah life of a student especially at this age should be geared towards success, geared towards accomplishment, then only tomorrow you will be nation builders, is not it? You will be people who will do something for this nation and for the globe at large. If you yourself do not have that energy, what will you do? So, this is all part of training will, do not think of will will descend to you from heavens, it is already within you, you have to free it. Training will means actually freeing it from negativities, compulsive drives, all kinds of things, useless things which it has got caught up with with bad habits, freeing it from all this. And you will see naturally the complete blossoming of will is possible. Once it is achieved, you can easily achieve any goal in life that is not no issue at all. So, in a way you are reconditioning your mental faculties through all these processes. And finally, I will give you one or two ah ideas on how to detach will hm this is the continuous message in the Bhagavad Gita also. Karma neva adhikaraste ma phaleshukadachana why do they keep saying this you see it is only the subjective detachment of will which takes the form of objective giving up of karma phal which means I I does not matter what the effect of that karma is I do not want anything out of it I will just do good I will just do the perform the action. This comes only if there is a subjective detachment of your will from the fruit of that action it is translated like this in in your life how is it going to matter. See if you are preoccupied with a certain goal, will you pay attention to the means? Tell me. There is a means and there is an end. When you are performing the means, your entire attention should be there. If you are preoccupied with the goal, you will not pay attention at all how you are going to go. So just now, only the means, what is right in front of you in your life just now this how it will work, did you get the point. So, do what you have to do completely with full dedication utterly sincerely and the effect the fruit will come by itself naturally. So, these are all the ways to develop willpower. See remember this no matter what action you perform, the effect is going to fall on you. An action can build you up or an action can degrade you. Action itself is ethically neutral, but the intention behind the action generates the positivity or negativity of the action, generate the effect of the action generates the positivity or negativity of the action generates the effect of the action. So, if your intentions are clear you know finally, an action is greatest effect is it builds you up. How does it build you up? Ok let me tell you a story here. I have to give examples. So, let me give you an example. There is a, there was one young boy like any of you, a teenager, and he wanted, he was in a village in India and he wanted to achieve something in life. But he did not have, his family did not have enough money. His father was a farmer. He stayed in a village. So he was thinking how to pursue my education and then a great career he was thinking what to do. So, every night he would pray to God that please help me build my life, please help me build my life. And then one day in a dream he had a vision in which God told him that you know behind your home there is a hill there was a hillock ah and there there is this huge boulder you go and push it and see what you will get. So, immediately the boy got up and he thought ah oh in that hill there is this boulder clearly he could visualize it and if I push it maybe there is some gold or some precious stone or something behind precious stones or hidden treasure something must be there and that is why you see this kind of a dream that go and push it and you will get something. So, let me try and next morning he went up the hill and as he was going through those tracks he really saw a big boulder like he had seen in his dream ah itna bada ek patthar tha wahan par huge one and he he thought this is the what I saw in his dream. Itna bada ek patthar tha wahan par. Huge one. And he thought this is what I saw in my dream. So behind this is the treasure. And so he started pushing that stone. He pushed and pushed and pushed the boulder for a long time. It was so huge he could not do it. So he came back and collected his friends and took them all in the evening. And that evening all of them push together, but it did not move. So, then he came back next day he took a crow bar and some other ah appliances and he went up again and tried again his best to ah push move the rock hm made a lever and tried tried all means all possible means, but it would not move. Then every day he made it a routine every morning he would take a walk on the hill and go there try to push the rock and then fail and then come back. So, this continued for about one month after one month he got exhausted and he thought that rock is not going to move it is too huge for me. So, that night he prayed to God that I tried my best but I can't move that rock so I will not be able to get whatever is behind it. So I will not go anymore. He prayed and he went to sleep and that night it seems again God appeared to him and said you know my son what did I ask you to do? I didn't tell you move the rock I said push it. the rock do you know what all this pushing and pulling has done to you it has made created your biceps your biceps have become so strong your leg muscles have become so strong your waist has become so strong confidence has come into your body and your mind and you have become diligent, you have become concentrated because you had this intense goal to push the rock. Self confidence has come into you, resilience has come into you and diligence has come into you and concentration has come into you, all you have developed your will power, you have developed tenacity of purpose, all this has come into you, you have become a man my son and this is what I wanted of you. I did not ask you to move the rock, that is why I I asked you to push it. So, a healthy mind in a healthy body is all that is required for success. It built you up the pushing and pulling. You get the point anything you perform in life, remember the external effect is always external, but what its effect on you that is actually going to build you up, it can build you up or if you do it with a very ah muddled up intention, it can affect you negatively also. So, remember any task you perform, it is going to build you up, it is going to affect you deeply. Vivekanth ke life me bhi aise ek story hai actually. You know once ah when he was a young boy, his he his father was an attorney in the Kolkata High Court, Kolkata High Court, but he used to give a give out a lot in charity, he used to earn well and give out a lot in charity also, he used to support a number of ah boys. Now, one day Narendranath Dutta that was his pre monastic name Vivekananda's and his mother told him that just go and ask your father what he has left for you, what he is left for you. And then Narayana Nath went and asked his father what are you leaving for me, what have you given me and his father said go and look into the mirror, you will see what I have left you and he went and stood before the mirror, there was a healthy body, a strong body, a bright face, brilliant eyes, confident look, a determined jaw he had you know a determined face. This is what this is the gift given to you a healthy mind in a healthy body can do anything it can get you the greatest things of life. So, you see this is already there in your hands. If you have built yourself up worked a little on yourself, you will see you can achieve anything in life. External achievement is not a great thing, but internally am I able to control all my faculties, direct them in the right direction, keep my inner balance and composure, this is what is really really important. You know how you react, how your responses to different situations, this decides the quality of your life. Ae abhi se aap samajh lo achi tarah se, no matter what your circumstances, your responses are finally what is going to affect you, what is going to matter to you. So, this is these are the things which we must pick up from these great lives . Another thing is see people have been doing work for ah with different intentions is not it, but when whenever we tell you the fifth point which I pointed out steps to developing will is detached work. How are people trying to achieve this detachment? Through various ways, they take up various attitudes. Some people say, these are all paths which our rishis have developed in order to develop this form of detachment. We will do it like Yajna. We will do Karma with the feeling of Yajna? What is the meaning of doing Karma with Yajna Bhava? Have you seen Yajna or Homa? They give oblations by saying Swaha. Why? Are they trying to get something out of it? They usually have a long list. is called Sakamakarma. In order to get all of this they are pouring oblations into fire. It is a form of worship of God, but the original meaning of Yajna was you see you are why are you pouring those oblations? It is a way of making you recognize reinforcing into your mind the fact that you have to give into universal life Yajna ka matla bhi hai You have taken so much for life now you have to give back something So it is in the form of an exchange You have taken, so you have to give back Uska ek symbolic representation of it This Swaha You have to give in life In order to reinforce this idea into you The symbolism of Yajna was created Later on we converted it into many things But the basic idea was this So you see when people wanted to detach work You can do it like Yajna You can do it like yagna, like yoga. These are all ways of converting work into yoga. Doing it in a detached manner. Or you can also do it as we say, Shiva Jnana, Shiva Seva. As a form of worship of the divinity in all beings. Isn't it? You can we are you can adopt any of these attitudes in order to convert work into a means for your transformation in order to generate detached work. Even when you say Shiva Gnana Jiva Shiva in worshipping the divinity within you by helping you by serving you, you come to the same point. It's a form of yoga. You naturally convert a work into a yoga. It's a form of worship now. Because actually this is the Vedantic vision. Isn't it that? Everybody's consciousness manifesting through different bodies and minds. So when you are serving another person, what is it that you are actually doing? You are worshipping the Lord within that person. So it comes to the same thing and easily a yoga banjata so you can adopt any of these methods in order to develop great will a powerful will through which you are able to achieve anything in life next we will go to decision making hm how do we take decisions this also there are 4 steps exhaustively we have discussed this here earlier in this seminar hall with the entire INA group . Here I will tell you briefly decision making involves 4 steps you see decision making is crucial to your life. Today you are taking small small decisions, tomorrow you will have to take huge decisions. And what state of mind should be there for a decision to be right, good, beneficial to everyone and through which you will ah fulfill yourself. For that you must know all of these options, all of these ah steps which I am giving you The very first step towards decision making is you must know all your options Isn't it? Now suppose you have to make a simple decision tomorrow Say what kind of a decision you may have to make How much I have to study in your assignment tonight? This is a simple decision you have to study in your assignment This is a simple decision you have to take First of all you must know all your options How much you can take in Then you select an option For that you have to know your mindset What is your capacity? What are your values? Where do you want to go? Everybody's capacities are not the same Everybody's value systems are not the same. So you find out your mindset. Third is you learn to differentiate between Shreyaskar and Prayaskar. We call it Shreyas and Prayas. Have you heard the word Shreyas? No? Shreyas means what is good for you. Prayas means that which is just pleasurable. It is called Prayaskar means that which is pleasurable. These are two different things. Many times what is good for us, that is just good for you. That may not give you any pleasure as such. Like for example concentrating on your studies at this point of time. Because you have an assignment. That is what isreyas Kar for you isn't it but Prayas Kar what will happen? Let's see from the person beside me or I will distract myself today so that maybe tomorrow I will remember better so all these things you must completely leave out of your life always concentrating on the this is a very important thing Shreyas or Prayas straight from the Upanishad it comes to us able to being able to differentiate between what is preferable and what is pleasurable Shreyas means what is preferable in any situation what should be done what should be done and pleasurable is Prayaskar what simply entertains you What should be done and pleasurable is prayaskar. What simply entertains you, what appears to be very nice to you. These two are different things. Shreyascha prayascha manushyam etat tau sampareetya viminaktir heerah. Kathopanishad says. Which means what the wise person, he is able to survey the entire thing and differentiate between shreyas and prayas. Agar aapko ye differentiation I know whatever is a pleasurable what entertains me for the moment that only is good for me. If this is our attitude then we have not learnt the basic thing in life. This ability to discriminate ye vivek kehte hain isko hai na. This must come into your life if you want to take successful good decisions Please see If you don't have this capacity, your decisions will not be right All that glitters is not gold It is said that everything that appears to be very beautiful, very glamorous That is not good for you. Just think about it. In the early morning, there is a cup of cake and an apple. Which one is better for you? Cake or apple? He is saying cake. It is the fruit that is better for you, isn't it? So here Shreyaskar became an apple and not the cake Prayaskar is cake So to be able to make this differentiation in any situation What is actually good and what is pleasurable You see whatever is prayaskar pleasurable will be more attractive many times But that doesn't mean it is good for you If you make this distinction, you will never get into drugs. You will never get into bad habits. You will never get into degrading, substance abuse, all these things. Because you have learnt to differentiate between Shreyas and prayers. The one that gives me immediate pleasure, is not good for me. There is something called short term pleasure and something called long term satisfaction. In Shreyas you are always aiming at long term satisfaction and fulfillment. In prayers you are only aiming at short term pleasure. Isn't it? You are aiming at shortcuts. Shortcuts will cut short your life. So learn to differentiate this. This is very important in decision making. If you take any book on decision making, they will skip this point because it is so difficult. But we are not going to skip it. What you require will be told to you. Differentiation between Shreyas and Prayas. Just now think and see, it is a very valid point for decision making And then third is exercise will by making it a fully conscious deliberate decision It means your decision must be from your conscious mind, isn't it? Or should it be majority opinion of your friends? Tell me, in decision making, should your opinion be the main one or your friends' opinion? If you take decisions like this, you will fail in your objective. Please understand this. On the weekend, all your friends said they will go for a movie, but used to depart . So, decision making itself means a conscious deliberate willful purposeful decision which you take on your own stand towards your own purposes hm. This is the third step and then you have to remove the other options from your mind. See once you have taken a decision, if you allow the other options to remain, what will your mind do you know, it will keep swinging towards them. Yeh hota hai na, you will keep thinking, are yeh karna tha, kya hota hai yeh karne se. So don't do this, you must remove the other options from your mind, this is very important. So that your will remains rivverted to one particular object, one particular goal. So, this is the way a decision is made. Try to apply it even to the small decisions of your life and you will see this works. And if you skip any one step, you will be in trouble. The four steps are you will know all your options, you you must know the way to select an option which means you will know your mindset, your value system accordingly you will differentiate shreyas and prayers yes hm. And then the third step is you exercise your will by making it a completely conscious deliberate decision, fourth is you remove the other options from your mind. When we come to the theory of ethics you will exactly know how you are able to differentiate between Shreyas and Prayas. You understand, how do you know the right and wrong of something? Why why do we say that what is pleasurable that alone is not that cannot be right always that is not right in your life ah. So, why do we say all this that you will gradually with life's experience you will know it, but here at least the theory of it you should know . Now, ah next let us go to yes, decision making, see in the Upanishads, there is a Chandogya Upanishad has this very beautiful mantra, they are telling you about this, how to develop will and decision whatever you do with full knowledge with full consciousness with alertness Shraddhaya with Shraddha with faith and Upanishad which means with the power of an enlightened awareness with the power of this awareness with meditation you can say whatever decision you make that leads to great strength great fortitude within you . So, develop a character by which you can do this or which meansdha ke saath, vidya ke saath, upanishad ke saath which means through meditation by the power of meditation by the power of higher awareness you are able to take your decisions not at the just you know just passing through life just taking any decision or majority opinion taking that not in that that is not a way that is the way of leading an unconscious life. That is a way of taking yourself into paths which you know you are not sure of. If you have to be able to take your decision you must be awake, alive, alert and committed to definite higher goals, then you can just take decisions like that. You will know the right and wrong it will become obvious to you in any situation, the right and wrong of something . So, these are all the tips given to you in our scriptures regarding decision making. Now, let me go into this which is important for you. How does how do you organize knowledge? Because you see karma applied to your cognitive faculty is organizing knowledge. Practically how does karma yog help you in organizing knowledge? You see there is a difference between data and information and knowledge, is not it? Do you know the difference? What is data? Data is unorganized facts and figures, always it will be voluminous. What is information? How does it differ from data? It is you can say categorized, systematized, contextualized, condensed data is called information and which means organized data is called information and what is knowledge, how does it differ from information. From this contextualized and categorized data which we are calling information, if you can draw your know how, your values, your insights, if you can draw your understanding, then we you call it knowledge. So, the three are different. Information knowledge nahi hai. If information was knowledge, you would you know who the greatest teacher would be? Your search engines would be your greatest teachers, Google would be your greatest teacher, but no Google can give you information it cannot give you knowledge. You know when MIT you know MIT I am sure. So, when they made all their courses available online you know the president of MIT was interviewed and he was asked is this such a prestigious institution, if you make everything available to students online, why will students want to come and take a pay such huge tuition fees and take the courses here. And then the president pointed out very clearly information is not knowledge. Knowledge itself means real education is not about information, it is about gaining something tangibly from the value system of the teacher, gaining something from direct contact with the teacher. So, knowledge is something which is transmitted, you understand it cannot be just taken from somewhere and so, the teacher is irreplaceable you can say in the learning process. So, do not think the three are the same, all these three are three different you can say you see that is why data occupies the base of the pyramid. As you proceed information, then at the peak is knowledge. Now, if you are able to gain knowledge in such a way from your data information whatever comes into your system, if you are able to manufacture knowledge out of it that contributes to your success. It can remain at the information level only, you know if you are not able to draw original know how out of it, it remains only at the level of information. Information will not give you success in life. And for this knowledge to become a accomplished fact, you have to develop all sides of your intellect. Entire gamut of knowledge available to you, it must be it is not just logical knowledge. You know there is in mathematics something called ah you have heard of it Goddell's theorem no ok in advanced mathematics it comes. The thing is this in a what it says is very simple in any axiomatic system there are statements in mathematics which can neither be proved nor disproved which means what this is not a philosophical statement it can be brought under very rigorous mathematical language which means what logic is not something perfect and the language of mathematics is insufficient to explain all knowledge. So, if you develop other faculties which means what you know logic is not the only form of knowledge, there are other forms of knowledge is not it there is creativity. If you develop the right brained faculties, thinking out of the box, thinking in such a way you are in a way synthesizing a number of knowledge streams. If you are able to develop these forms of thinking, you will see even sevabhav you know it helps you get this form of knowledge, because it develops your emotional quotient. If you develop these forms of knowledge, you will you will see the the way you organize knowledge, the way you think it is a more holistic form of evolution development. Merely logic through logic you cannot go very far. Logic will take you very far in your fundamental sciences which you are studying today. Later on you need a many more sciences, you need to develop your emotional intelligence, you need to develop your spiritual intelligence, you must know how to keep people together, how to work with your team, how to live with your family, how to make positive relationships and that requires a different category of knowledge which will come only if there is this holistic growth. So, remember knowledge comes again through not just through data and information that is one means it comes through life process, life interactions, it comes by by by developing your right brain faculties, your creativity, your original thinking capacities, it comes through seva, the knowledge it comes through seva. The knowledge which comes through seva, it cannot come through books. This very fact of doing something for others, it changes both minds. It will bring you immense knowledge, very beneficial knowledge. So, all this are forms of knowledge only, do not think that is on something else these are all forms of knowledge everything is required for your growth. Traditionally speaking you know karma and knowledge will always put now just now what are we studying we are studying the effect of karma on cognition on your cognitive faculty. Traditionally these two were put very much apart versus each other, Gnan versus Karma. This is how for many centuries, we have mishandled both in a way in India, but in the Bhagavad Gita and all you will find it very clearly put that the two are not different. In fact, you require a lot of Karma Yoga to digest high level knowledge. You know, let me tell give you an example here suppose you eat good food, but you are allergic to some substance there and your your body has converted that into toxin . Even good food the system will convert into toxic effect into a toxin. So, also even something glorious like yoga vedanta, if your system is not trained by karma yoga, it can you cannot digest it, you cannot ingest it. Great thoughts require a certain amount of background ah preparation to become to to be able to assimilate them to become digestible and that is what Karma Yoga does for you. That is what Karma does for you. By continuously performing selfless action, you get the ability to digest great knowledge, to connect with great knowledge systems like Yoga, Vedanta, all this. So, that is why Karma Yoga is fundamental. It is the way to build you up. Aap agar hamare ashramon mein aayenge, you will see for a large part of the day we are engaged in work, good work. Why? You see no life is separated from work. Life itself means it is a manifestation. And so, all your energies should go towards doing something for the community, doing something for others in such a way that whatever you are doing becomes a yoga for you. So, they complement each other, they lead to each other. So, this is what you should know about karma and cognition and then karma also helps build your effective faculty effective faculty which means it has build your emotions good emotions in you all your negativities try to see your problems they are mainly due to emotional insecurities, fear, anxiety, hatred, jealousy, emotional anxieties, emotional insecurities you can say. Now how to change all this through work? The solution is only one. Through good work if you keep doing good on a regular basis, what will happen? The mind becomes more and more cheerful. All this will naturally go out of your life work good work karma yoga is the best way to refine your emotions and sublimate your emotions so it is primary it is fundamental to your development It is not that we will do yoga or meditation only Please know this This is basic If you have the pranavata that I will bring good to others Naturally all the time whenever I can Whenever an opportunity arises Then yoga is possible in that life Please remember one thing Karma is not just what you do But also what you do not do when you are capable of doing. If you have the resources, if you have the means and yet you did not go out and help, yet you did not do for somebody who asked you for something, that also generates negative karma. It is not just what you do, but what you fail to do that also generates karma. So remember through Karma Yoga, all of this will be taken care of. Even your effective faculty and many people, you know, have these sort of irrational fears, guilt. According to Vedanta, there is nothing called sin man is not a sinner he is he's originally divine and sin is sort of advantageous you can say it's some bad work may be done for momentarily due to some bad influence it can be overcome through good work so all these feelings of guilt and fear and all this will naturally go out of your mind if you keep doing good work. So, this is how it changes the emotional quotient of your mind karma. This is another one of its many people you see all the people who have left their impact on this world they have been transformed by seva you see the life of any leader. You will see such tremendous, enormous contribution to his community, to his society, to his nation. He would have done definitely. That's why he becomes a leader. Have you read the life of Sister Nivedita? Any of you? No? She was the Irish disciple of Swami Vivekananda. See, she was a young woman who had done very well in her ah in England she was actually a teacher she was a headmistress of a school she was an educationist of repute and she was part of the intellectual circles of London she left everything just to come and inherit the Indian spiritual heritage she did not come here to patronize Indians or take up a few projects. She came to dedicate her life to the service of this country. She is a remarkable woman. Sometime you can read her life and when she came here, you know, she plunged into seva first a life of seva completely transformed by Seva Nivedita she became sister Nivedita Margaret Noble became sister Nivedita through Seva what did she do in 1899 this was she came to India in 1898 in 1899 there was famine not famine plague outbreak of plague in Kolkata in that Bagh Bazaar area you know everyone was plague stricken. She went about although she was warned that long hours she should not spend there in those damp colonies. She went about nursing all the sick patients of plague from home to home she went and she would sit there nurse the children affected by plague, nurse their mothers, she limited her food just to milk and fruits and milk also she used for the patients of plague. This kind of contribution she has done. She was seen standing on ladders painting the walls of those homes where plague had infected, ah painting the walls with disinfectant so that they can be protected. And people how you know how they would ah treat the disease, they would collect all the dirt in their homes and throw it on the street. And she would go about sweeping those streets, seeing her a number of young men came and said no sister we will do this, it is our they are our streets we should be doing it this is how she served and she got transformed into such a great woman so Seva has tremendous transforming power you don't think this way, everything happens in the mind, just by thinking it will happen you have to do it, why are there hands and feet human body itself is meant for this is the Parama Dharma you remember doing good to others bringing solace comfort to others this is the purpose of human life . So, you can know ah through all these examples where exactly we are going . Now, let me also tell you see how you look upon your work is ah your attitude towards your work is going to develop further your will power, your ability to take right decisions, your attitude towards your work which means what see you can have a very simple attitude well I am doing this work for my own purposes. You can have a bigger ideal, you can have an ultimate goal for which you are doing that work. I will illustrate with an example you see this actually happened in New England. There was they were building a huge church and the chief engineer of that church he just wanted to find out what the people who are actually building the construction workers ah the manual laborers you can say what exactly they thought of the project. So, he was a very wise man who wanted to ah sort of positively affect everybody. So, he went about asking those bricklayers he asked one person ah my brother what are you doing exactly he did not know he was the chief engineer of that church. So, he asked him what are you doing and he said I am laying bricks ok. Then he went after sometime he found another one and he said my ah brother what are you doing and he said I am earning a few shillings he is doing the same job laying bricks all of them are bricklayers. Then he left him and went to a third person and asked what are you doing he said I am building a great Cathedral you see whether you are laying bricks or you are obeying your boss or you are building a great Cathedral it all depends on how you look upon your work in what context have you placed your present work, have you placed it in a large context or only . You will end up very poor I am telling you, but if your philosophy is you are you must see your work as part of a great cosmic movement, a great universal force and you are contributing positively to it. In fact, that is what all work is about. So, see it in the larger context and you will find the right attitude towards work. You get the point, it will help you expand. Now finally, we will come to we have just 15 minutes. So, I will come to one important point for you in leadership which is time management. See we discussed the effect of karma on all your faculties, we discussed how do you develop your will power and your decision making capacities. Practically all this is useful to you in achieving excellence, human excellence. This is what success is about being excellent at your job and for that one very important ingredient is time management. You know there are many people not at all bothered about time. When you work with a team know you will understand this very clearly. They are very good intentioned and full of service and all that, but they cannot manage time. There will be many such people. How what happens as a result? They delay the whole group and if you cannot manage time, you cannot organize your life activities, you cannot organize work, you cannot organize knowledge systems. So, ultimately there will be failure, there will be loopholes. If you cannot manage time, what is time management about? Let me illustrate to you what is time management about hm. In one classroom, the teacher, the lecturer was telling his students, I let me tell see how much you know about time management and he showed them he showed them a bucket he showed them a bag of sand and a few pebbles and a few rocks three things sand pebbles rocks and a bucket and he said ok now one of you come and put all these things into the bucket let me see how you put. So, the one student came he took the sand he poured it into the bucket everything should fit into the bucket ah that is what the lecturer said. So, the first student he put sand into the bucket then he put pebbles then he put rocks and the rocks were protruding out of the bucket and then the lecturer looked at him and said this is very bad my time management. You should first put the rocks, then you put the pebbles, then you put the sand and nothing will protrude nothing will overflow you see everything this place for everything. Now he said this is time management time management is like this which means what the most difficult important things the bigger one jobs you do it first. You put your entire time and energy main part of your time energy everything into the most important big jobs on an everyday basis and then the smaller ones, then the smallest ones. If you give all your time and energy in something that is useless and unnecessary, some small thing, you will have no more energy for the bigger jobs, which means what? What is the key of time management then? Prioritization. You must decide the priority of things, what is important to you in your particular context, in your ah particular say job just now what is important for you. If you are not able to decide this you know very good intentions you may have, but you will be wasting not just the your own time, time of your colleagues, your entire team and there will not be success. Time management is very important, it is a skill life skill you can say, not just at your job even at home. People who cannot manage their time always keep saying I have no time. You see carefully their priorities are something very strange, they do not know how much time to give to what and then they keep saying I have no time. So, this is basic intelligence to develop your IQ you need to manage your learn to manage your time. See we are all given the same time is not it, some people use it so effectively, some people are always complaining no time and too much work. A lot of work fulfills you it does not exhaust you if you know how to manage your time. If you do not know how to manage your time work is nothing, but exhaustion. Prioritization is very important. See look at this chart here it is giving you everything about time management. One by one just look at all the points it is giving you. Perseverance, when things do not go right, develop strategies for dealing with pressure such as taking regular exercise, take a positive attitude towards failure, you learn most from your mistakes. This perseverance also is part of time management, you will see how. Share tasks or problems with others, but say no to others when short of time. See what I am what they are trying to tell you is suppose you have to ah do too many jobs at a time, then you prioritize you choose the ones which are truly important and keep aside the rest. You must be able to say no to that. This is also part of time management. Avoid procrastination. This is common even for students. No, a leader will never do that. You see that the best time to do something is usually now. Taking action generates the impetus for further action. Organize your work to meet deadlines, reward yourself for achieving goals. You must be able to do your everyday work that same day. Do not ever keep it for tomorrow because that will become a habit and too much will get accumulated and then you cannot face it. So, this is another life skill. Then use a time log, write down everything you do in a week to identify areas of your life where you waste time and the times when you are most productive schedule demanding task for these times. See there are different times of the day when people are most productive and active. Have you seen this? Some people are very active and productive early morning, some people are very active and productive night at night, some in the evenings. So, definite you study your own biological clock and find out when is it that you feel the most alert and alive, when you can muster all your energies and fix those times for the most important tasks at hand. This is very important. Why do we say that we should do this at this time? Earlier, we used to do this. We should do meditation in Brahma Muhurta. Some of the best periods of the day are being caught for the truly important things of life. So, you must learn to become sensitive, time sensitive and sensitive to your own biological clock to study at what periods how does my mind behave. Not that your mind is under time, I am telling you mind is nothing, but an inbuilt mechanism of your mind, but the thing is at definite periods of time an inclination can come to do certain things so if you study you will come to know like after eating you feel like taking rest sometimes so you must be able to regulate life in such a way you tap the best times for productive activity. Then take regular breaks, get up and move around at least once an hour if at computer to refresh your mind. Once you are working for long hours you will know this very important at the workplace it becomes very important. Create habits, try to do tasks at the same time and in the same location each day. This is what I told you. Routinizing life. It is important. Then what happens is at that time, every time you will be prepared for the task, your mind will naturally go into it. You know, this happens easily in our life because we do things in fixed times. Then prioritize. Do urgent and important tasks first. Not the easy things. Have a reminder system. Efficiency and effectiveness are not the same. Effective people focus on the important tasks at hand. Avoid distractions and interruptions to your work, keep your desk tidy that will keep your mind also clear you know. Check email at set points in the day rather than when it comes in. WhatsApp and email you must do this you know I also I use a mobile phone, but it is always in off mode in silent mode only at very definite times all my friends and whoever is in contact with me they know it only at definite times of the day I check it. Otherwise what will happen anybody sending anything at any time and your attention is diverted to that. What is the point? Mobile phone you can use it in so many ways, it would distract you, you can use it to do something very solid meaningful you can use it. So, limit it is use in such a way it only helps you build what you want to achieve. A very important point practically of use to you anytime you keep it ready to distract you do not do this that is not its purpose at all . So, this is what is called ah avoiding interruptions in work rather than when it comes in ah and then turn off Facebook and Twitter . What is the need and then action planning set clearly define goals break task down into steps and do one task at a time and redo it or all together goals must be realistic and achievable I told you your immediate goals is what you want to do immediately. Your long term goal is the kind of life you want to achieve as a result of all this career and everything, but your immediate goals is should be achievable. Just now I want to achieve this. Then keep a to do list, update this every day, aaj kya karna hai, even I do this you know, every day morning what I have to do today, so that you do not miss out on something. Then write down your deadlines, very important. Then emphasize key points, review your progress, revise plans as appropriate, map, map put several routes to your goal, have a contingency plan. So, you see well planned out goal orientation should be there. So, all of this you see if you bring these elements into your life, time management is easy. If time management is is actually working in in your life effective in your life, you will see ah you can attain your goals easily naturally you will be a leader. A leader is very particular about time because he he works like that internally. It is fixed in internally that is why he is particular about external time also. You understand time management is very important a leader sees something more than what others can see. He is a visionary of a kind only because all of this is well made in his system. Aise waise hi leader hua nahi ja sakta. You must be very committed to your goals and whatever is required for those goals should come into your life naturally Time management is one such thing So, these are the things you must bring into your life and naturally you will be a winner anywhere The purpose, direction of your will direction of your intention and decisions all of this must be very clear to you. In this session this is what is to be learnt. My will, my decision, purpose and direction, time management all this is part and parcel of my personality . You can anytime bring or if if it is not part of my personality just now anytime I can bring it in not that it is a theory . I can bring it into my life anytime because what is character I told you it is a bundle of habits . You can change those habits anytime If it's not there, I will bring it in It's not a fixed something You know personality itself Let me give you a Vedantic idea here Personality itself It is not a fixed something Persona ka matlab kya hai aapko pata hai Persona means It's a mask Through which you are functioning You as consciousness are functioning through this body mind complex. What you are calling personality is the whole of this body plus mind plus consciousness. So, at any time you can change the faculties of your mind to achieve definite goals, not that it is all prefixed SI hoga or SI hoga. So, take it into your hands that is always the bottom line of every session you must make the required changes in your life so as to better your life ok. Now I heard there are you have a lot of questions on the previous session also. So, we will stop this session here anybody who has questions can ask we will stop this session. Yes. Our next class is on Friday same time 4.30 to 6.00. Next class is next Friday ok 4.30 to 6.00 and then we will decide about Saturday class can you come next Saturday also because Wednesday there is no class Saturday can you come

